
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE MUSLIM COMMITTEE OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Willingdon
Audience: Muslim Committee of Bombay
Date: 18 April 1931
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Let me thank you. Mr. President and Members of 
the representative Muslim Committee of Bombay, for 
your cordial welcome to myself on my return after a 
few years’ absence to your country to take up the 
responsible position of Viceroy and Governor-General of 
India, and let me particularly express my gratitude to 
you today for welcoming my wife and myself amongst 
you as old and honoured friends, and assure you of our 
pleasure and delight at the chance of living and working 
amongst you once again. We are very grateful, too, that 
you should have remembered such humble services as we 
may have rendered here to our fellow citizens in the 
past, and rejoice that we shall have further and wider 
opportunities of working for their welfare in the future. 

You have spoken, Mr. President, of the concern felt 
by the Muslims and other minority communities in the 
matter of the safeguarding of their rights and interests 
under the new constitution that is now in process of 
formation. The exact nature of such safeguards is a 
matter on which it is clearly not possible for me at this 
juncture to say a word, but I can make this observation 
that any constitution, whatever its form, that may be 
designed for the future government of India, will depend 
for its successful working more upon the contentment 
of each of the many communities that go to make up the 
vast population of this country than upon any other 
single factor that I can think of. And it is, therefore, 
essential to the harmony of the whole design that no 
single part of it, whether the Muhammadan community 
or any other, should feel that their due rights are in 
danger or inadequately guarded for the future. You 
have rightly made it dear that safeguards for communities 
will be justified not by the extent, to which they perpetuate 
diversities but by the extent to which they serve to 
promote unity. 

Gentlemen, you will appreciate that the time ever of 
a Viceroy designate is not entirely his own and I must 
ask you to forgive me if reply to your address is 
brief. I have indeed been forced by the pressure of 
other engagements to forego the pleasure of receiving 
other addresses which certain bodies in this hospitable 
city had been kind enough to propose. I shall hope, 
however, to meet many of its leading citizens at the 
Willingdon Sports Club this afternoon, and I can assure 
you that both Lady Willingdon and I look forward keenly 
to the time when we shall be able to revisit at greater 
leisure the city among whose people we spent six very 
happy years. 

I thank you, gentlemen, for your great kindness this 
morning, and I would assure you once more of the deep 
and abiding interest I shall always take in everything 
that concerns the welfare of the Muslim community in 
India. 
