
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE INDIAN MERCHANTS' CHAMBER AND BUREAU, BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Chelmsford
Audience: Indian Merchants' Chamber and Bureau
Date: 4 April 1916
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address and the address being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

I am delighted to receive an address from the Committee 
of the Indian Merchants’ Chamber and Bureau and I thank 
you for your cordial welcome. 

We all of us deplore the grievous ravages to which the 
commerce and industries of the world have been subjected 
by this terrible war, and, like you, I look forward to the day 
when once more we shall be able to devote our entire attention to the pursuits of the arts of peace and industry. 

But we must not take too gloomy a view of the situation. 
I would ask you to look abroad and compare your position 
with that of the Allied European countries. In them it is 
scarcely an exaggeration to say that trade is at a standstill 
and that all energies are devoted to the production of that 
horribly wasteful article — munitions of war. 

You, however, in this favoured land, thanks to the might 
of the British Navy, have been able to carry on your avocations practically unimpeded. The past few months have, as I learn, been with you a period of remarkable prosperity as 
regards inland trade. The railways have made earnings which 
have passed all records. Cotton commands high prices. Your 
local mill industry is booming and shares in all well-managed 
mills stand high. The stocks of imported piece-goods which 
some months ago were heavy and threatened to be a heavy 
burden on the trading community have now disappeared into 
consumption at greatly enhanced prices, 

I would bid you then take heart. You have no doubt 
suffered losses, but what losses have the United Kingdom, 
France, Russia, Belgium, and Servia endured ? 

And now for the future. I agree with you that this is 
the moment when we should institute enquiries into schemes 
of development during the years to come, when peace once 
more reigns upon the earth. 

The Government of Bombay is already considering 
through a strong committee the question of the development 
of indigenous industries. 

The Government of India has also taken the first step 
towards inaugurating a wider and more general enquiry. I 
can assure you that any well-thought-out - scheme for the 
development of Indian industries will at all times command 
my whole-hearted support. 

I pass over the various minor matters to which you refer, 
as I have not at present the personal knowledge with regard to 
them which is requisite for a suitable reply. I have no doubt 
however that the Departments concerned will take note of 
them. 

It is a great pleasure to me to meet the representatives 
of so great and flourishing a commercial community, and 
I again thank you on behalf of Lady Chelmsford and myself 
for your cordial welcome. 

