
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Chelmsford
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 1 April 1921
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech:  

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, — As your address has pointed 
out, this is the third occasion on which I have had the pleasure 
of receiving an address from the Bombay Chamber of Commerce. No one in 1916 could have foreseen the immense strides which India has made constitutionally during these 
past five years, and I know that when at the end of 1917 Mr
Montagu and I had an interview with your Chamber, neither 
of us anticipated that we should be able to bring the new 
Constitution into being and working so soon as 1921. It is 
thou with very great pride and satisfaction that to-day I look 
upon the new Constitution not only embodied in an Act of 
Parliament, but tested by the experience of the first session 
which is just coming to a close throughout India. I could wish 
that the general public had expressed greater appreciation of 
the work done by the men who have accomplished this remarkable feat. It was one thing to outline a constitution and to lay down its principles; quite another to translate those 
principles into the numerous sections of an Act and the multifarious rules and regulations necessary to make the constitution a living reality. This was the work of many officials 
throughout India — at headquarters and in the provinces, and 
those officials have laid India under a deep debt of gratitude 
for the work which they did under conditions of great pressure 
and of a time-limit. I acted myself as Member for Reforms 
in the Central Government, and so had ample opportunity 
of seeing at close quarters the admirable work which was done. 

I must also express my great satisfaction at the manner in 
which the new Indian Legislature and the new Provincial 
Councils have carried through the work of the opening sessions. 
They have shown a sense of balance and responsibility which 
has been beyond all praise, and if our new Constitution 
continues to be worked in the spirit of good-will which has 
marked the opening sessions, I have full confidence in the 
success which will crown the new Constitution. 

I am glad to accept your congratulations on the share that 
India bore in the victorious conclusion of the Great War, 
but the problems which have faced us since the Armistice 
have been even more difficult than those which we had to 
tackle during the war itself. During the war the Government 
could rely on the full and absolute support of all people, even 
though they might differ from some of the actions which 
Government thought necessary to take. With, however, the 
cessation of war, criticism naturally resumed its place in our 
daily life, and Government could no longer expect that solid 
support which it had received during the war, I would, however, impress on people generally that many of the problems which we have to face are not peculiar to India alone, but 
depend upon factors which are world-wide and beyond the 
control of the Government of India. No one will realise 
this more fully than you, gentlemen, who are connected with 
the commerce of this country, and so are cognisant of world 
affairs. I am glad to learn from you that there has been a 
breaking-down of the barrier that in the past divided Government from commerce, and that cordial relations have not only existed but have even improved between the heads of the 
administration and the principal Chambers of Commerce and 
non-official organisations connected with trade during the 
past five years. This is largely due to the sympathetic and 
tactful handling of these questions by the retiring Member for 
Commerce and Industry, Sir George Barnes, and I was glad 
to see that at a dinner given to him by commercial men in 
Delhi his services to commerce in India were so warmly recognised. No one knows better than I how keenly he has thrown himself into the work of his Department and how 
readily he has, placed his knowledge and long experience of 
trade matters at the disposal of all who wished to get his advice. 

The Government of India at Delhi and Simla are far 
removed from the centres of commercial activity, but I have 
always encouraged my colleagues to tour and keep in touch 
with the Provinces. I appreciate then your reference to the 
closer touch between commerce and Government during my 
tenure of office. It has been my constant endeavour to 
achieve this result. 

I am afraid that at the present moment trade conditions 
are depressing, but I am confident that if only a method can 
be devised by which the countries which wish to trade with 
India can be enabled to find credit, all India’s difficulties will 
pass away. The world has need of India’s products, and 
I am sure that every effort must be made to devise a credit 
system under which our goods may be bought by foreign 
countries. 

The Great War brought one good thing to India ; it forced 
India to take stock of her industrial resources, and the experience gained in this way, coupled with the illuminating and comprehensive survey of the industries of the country given 
by the Industrial Commission, ought to give a wonderful 
stimulus to industrial development. 

I leave India then full of hope as to its future. Through 
our Constitutional Reforms I look forward to a better understanding and a closer co-operation between Government and non-officials. 

I see a world asking for India’s products and I accept no 
bounds to the possibilities of future trade, not only in raw 
material, but in the finished articles the products of an industrial renaissance. 

Through partnership in Government and trade British 
and Indians should come closer together and I see misunderstandings removed and unity and harmony prevail. To understand is to forgive, and there can be no greater bond of 
unity than that which comes from the understanding which 
is the result of partnership in work.

I thank you for the good wishes which you have expressed 
in relation to my wife and myself. I shall always watch with 
the greatest interest and sympathy the fortunes of India in 
the spheres of constitutional progress and of commercial and 
industrial development. 
