
Title: VISIT TO THE SCHOOL OF ART, BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Lansdowne
Audience: Principal and students of the Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy School of Art
Date: 3 December 1888
Location: Mumbai
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Griffiths and Students of the School of Art,— I do 
not like to leave this building without expressing to you 
the great pleasure it has given me to visit this institution on this the first day of my residence in India. I sometimes think when I hear people talking of our efforts 
to teach art in this country that we should be a little 
cautious as to how we attempt anything of the kind, because you have already in India so much good art of your own, that I think we Europeans should think twice before 
we arrogate to ourselves any supremacy in regard to 
matters connected with art. (Hear, hear.) But I do not 
understand that your efforts here, Mr. Griffiths, and those 
of your staff, are directed to anything like a supersession or 
removal of Indian art. I understand, on the contrary, that 
it is your object to encourage that art in its best and noblest 
types, and we are well aware how excellent in all respects 
those types are. I may venture to tell you that nothing 
made more impression upon my fellow-countrymen in 
England than the admirable art-exhibits of all kinds which 
were sent from this country to the great Exhibition held in 
London on the Jubilee anniversary of Her Majesty the 
Queen-Empress. (Cheers.) While I admit that to the full, 
and while I admit that we in Europe have a great deal to 
learn from you — and we have learnt a great deal from you in 
matters of art — it is still possible that we may do something to bring within your reach types and forms of art culture with which you are not already familiar. The admirable collection of classical casts round this room are a fair illustration of my meaning, and I do not think that any 
one who loves art for the sake of art can find nobler 
designs or nobler ideals of art than those supplied from 
such sources as these. I will only say one word more, and 
it is to express the satisfaction with which I notice in this 
room, and the room above, that art students are beginning 
in a thoroughly conscientious and honest manner at the 
bottom of the tree, and so working up from the first principles of copying unambitious and elementary models and designs, gradually to the top. I believe, Mr. Grifiiths, what 
you told me just now was well within the mark when you 
said that the student who carried away the certificate of 
this institution possessed credentials which would satisfy 
the public that he had had a sound grounding in the principles of art, I have only once more to express the satisfaction which this visit has given me, and to wish you very 
cordially success in the careers which you have chosen for 
yourselves, and in which I have no doubt your studies here 
will yield most excellent fruit. (Loud cheers). 