
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE CENTRAL NATIONAL MAHOMEDAN ASSOCIATION
Speaker: Lord Elgin
Audience: Central National Mahomedan Association
Date: 31 December 1898
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. A description of the speech being responded to is in the book. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen of the Central Mahomedan Association, — I 
thank you for the kind and friendly words which you have 
just spoken. They are of a piece with many of the greetings which I have received from many Mahomedans in 
many parts of India. I think the general turn of our conversation on such occasions has been that I have heard much of the aspirations of Mahomedans to have opportunities for loyal service, and representations as to the manner in which that result might be achieved. Now on 
the military side there is no difficulty. In war the Mahomedan soldier has always been distinguished for courage, for powers of endurance, and for general soldier-like 
qualities which make any soldier of the Government proud 
to stand by his side; and in the events of the last few 
years to which you have alluded the Mahomedan soldier 
has had his opportunity, and has taken full advantage of it. 
But I quite admit that on the civil side there are some 
difficulties, and these difficulties have been frankly stated 
to me. They consist very much in a certain backwardness in the cultivation amongst your community of those 
elements of knowledge which in these days are essential 
to success in public life, and I think I may say that it has 
been freely admitted that that backwardness and those 
disabilities are due not to any disqualifications imposed 
upon you by the Government of the country, but by certain 
obstacles which arise out of the customs and history of 
your people. From that point of view they are obstacles 
which it is the interest and wish of anybody connected 
with the Government of the country to see removed ; but 
at the same time, in older that I may be as frank in speaking to you as you have been in speaking to me, I may say that I have always felt it to be my duty to point out to you 
that the first means of avoiding these obstacles was that 
you should help yourselves. There is no royal road, and I 
should say there is no Government road, to success in 
these matters in these days. Even the sons of kings must 
go through that preparation in early life which instils into 
them gentlemanly feelings and aptitude for business, and 
even kings themselves must, as much as, indeed I might 
even say much more than, any of their subjects, maintain their position by good and honest work. Now I am glad to believe that Mahomedans generally in India fully 
recognise these facts and are willing to bestir themselves to meet them. During the past year you have 
lost, much to my regret, and I am sure to the regret 
of all of you, the pioneer of this movement, the 
late Sir Syed Ahmed, But I am persuaded that his 
spirit still remains, not only in the College at Aligarh 
which he founded and which will always remain as a 
memorial to him, but also in the spirit which has led to the 
establishment of educational institutions in many other 
parts of the country. Now I do not wish to be misunderstood. I do not wish to advocate education merely as a matter of attaining as many university degrees as other 
competitors in the race. I do not mean to depreciate 
university degrees; they are good in themselves, and they 
are still better if they denote a desire to excel in the 
higher branches of study and learning, and, so far as I am 
competent to judge, I imagine that Mahomedanism has 
outlets for the student and scholar which might, with 
advantage to the world, be followed up; but what I am 
especially alluding to at this moment is the education 
which should turn out your sons as good, honest, trustworthy citizens, capable of taking their place not only in the public service but in all walks of life as men of probity 
and intelligence. I hope and believe that in making these 
remarks and in advocating these principles I shall have the 
support of the Central Mahomedan Association. I have 
been very much led to make them because I hold in my 
hand a telegram which I received only this morning from 
the Mahomedan Educational Conference in the City of 
Lahore, expressing in very warm terms, which I greatly 
appreciate, the gratitude of that Conference for the sympathy which, in a humble way, I have been able to express to the Aligarh College, as representing the cause of 
Mahomedan education in India. 

I hope, Gentlemen, that you will also be able to recognise in what I have said, and in anything I have done during my stay in India, that I have been desirous of 
treating with all respect your social usages and religious 
customs, and I rejoice to know that you, in common with 
all the inhabitants of this Province, are convinced that you 
will always find that respect from the present Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal. I cannot shut my eyes to the fact that times of difficulty may be before you in the future, 
but if they do come, I am sure that they will be more easily 
met if you will act in co-operation with the Government, 
in the spirit which you have advocated in your address. 

Gentlemen , I have to thank you all for the constant 
kindness which you and the Mahomedans of Calcutta and 
India have always shown us during our stay here, and also 
for the good wishes which you have expressed for me and 
my family, and to wish you in return all prosperity. 