
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MILL-OWNERS' ASSOCIATION
Speaker: Lord Reading
Audience: Bombay Mill-owners' association
Date: 1 April 1926
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Gentlemen.— I am most grateful to the members of your 
various Associations for presenting me with this address on the 
occasion of my departure from Bombay. I am glad to 
receive your testimony regarding the satisfaction which the 
abolition of the cotton excise duties has given to the representatives of the important cotton textile industry. As I have already made clear in my speeches to the Legislatures and the 
Associated Chambers of Commerce and also in reply to a deputation from the interests which you, Gentlemen, represent, the Government of India was pledged to the abolition of these 
duties as soon as financial conditions permitted. That the 
abolition was somewhat long deferred was due to the crisis of 
the war and the financial stringency which obscured the 
outlook in the period of acute economic depression following 
upon it. By rigid economy and prudent measures, however, 
the financial position has now been stabilised ; and although 
at this time twelve months ago and in the first-half of last 
financial year the position was still too uncertain to make any 
definite commitment, later when the year had declared itself 
and there seemed a reasonable prospect of a surplus, which I 
am happy to say has been subsequently realised, I and my 
Government at once took steps to examine whether, what I 
knew to be your wishes and the wishes of the Central Legislature, could be put into effect without undue financial risk ; and after careful consideration I suspended by the issue of 
an Ordinance the collection of the duties from the 1st of 
December last. The abolition of the duties has now been 
brought forward by my Government as a permanent measure 
and passed into law by the Legislature. 

I am gratified that I was able to take this step during 
my period of office. It was in particular a source of satisfaction 
to me that I found myself in a position to give the relief at a 
time when it was specially needed. The suspension came into 
effect at a moment when the conditions of the industry were 
unusually perplexing and when labour disputes in Bombay 
had added to the difficulties. His Excellency the Governor 
kept me in close touch with the situation in Bombay, and I 
watched events with anxious sympathy. The disappearance 
of the duties will, I trust, help to solve some of the general 
problems confronting the mill-owners' while the prompt and 
generous action of the owners in Bombay in restoring the 
reduction in wages has already borne fruit in the termination of 
the labour disputes in Bombay. 

You may be confident that the Government of India attach 
the greatest importance to the textile industry and have the 
fullest desire to encourage the enterprise which has so 
successfully started and carried on large spinning and weaving 
concerns in Bombay, Cawnpore and other centres and gives 
employment to a large number of operatives. India takes a 
just pride in the establishment of this great industry, and the 
Government of India are equally solicitous for its prosperity. 

Measures for improving prospects have been, under discussion 
between the Associations connected with the management of 
the industry and the Government of India ; and you have 
received the views of the latter regarding certain concrete 
suggestions put forward by you. As far as Government is 
concerned, I repeat, there is every desire to assist the industry ; 
but Government must be satisfied that measures free from objection and generally appropriate are adopted. The eventual welfare of the industry is a purpose common to both the mill-owners and to Government ; and it is only in regard to the precise steps, which can most usefully be taken, that there is 
room for a difference of view. Sir Charles Innes, the Member 
of my Executive Council in charge of the Commerce Department, 
is now in Bombay ; and I trust you will take this opportunity 
of freely and frankly exchanging views with him. The 
fuller the discussion, the better will be the prospects of arriving 
at a solution. 

Before I take leave of you let me express my appreciation 
of the public spirit which individual members of the Mill-owners’ Associations have always displayed during my term of office. A number of them have served as Members on the 
Central and Provincial Legislatures where their experience of 
commerce, industry and finance has been of great assistance to 
the administration. Individual members have also been most 
generous in their donations to charities and public purposes ; 
and I gratefully acknowledge their unselfish activities in these 
directions both on behalf of local and all-India objects. 

Gentlemen, I thank you again for your address and 
kind wishes. Though I am shortly to sever my official 
concern with the interests you represent, I shall always 
keep in touch with the progress of the great industry in 
India which you direct and you have my warmest wishes 
for its future prosperity. 
