
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Irwin
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 3 April 1926
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Gentlemen, — Lady Irwin and I thank you warmly for 
the welcome you have extended to us in the name of the 
Bombay Chamber of Commerce. I am grateful for your 
reference to the family connection which I may claim to 
have with India through my grandfather, and to my own 
public work in England, I trust that my past association 
with several departments of Government at home, and 
with different parts of the Empire as Under Secretary of 
State for the Colonies may assist me in the duties which 
I am about to undertake in India, 

You have, Gentlemen, in your address, touched upon 
one matter in which I, though new to India, take the 
deepest interest. This is the appointment of a Royal 
Commission on Agriculture, of which I note with satisfaction your approval. 

By instinct and upbringing I am a countryman, and 
as a former Minister of Agriculture in England I have 
been brought into close contact with its administrative 
problems. I am therefore able to appreciate at their 
full worth the wisdom and statesmanship of Lord Reading, 
at whose instance this commission was set up. For in a 
country where agriculture is the principal industry, there 
can be no higher object than to increase the prosperity 
of the cultivators who form the overwhelming majority of 
the population. 

Experience, however, elsewhere has taught me that 
there is no royal road or short cut to agricultural improvement. Nature moves at her own pace, and to deal even with a single crop demands years of patient labour, and 
the necessary processes of research, experiment, demonstration and seed distribution cannot be hurried. But agricultural progress is not only a question of plant or stock 
improvement. It depends upon the solution of a host 
of allied problems, of which education and co-operative 
credit are only two of the most important.

In all this vast field, nothing has impressed me more 
than the results already achieved by your agricultural 
workers. I have only recently become acquainted with 
their work, and I find that, since agricultural departments 
in the modern sense were created over 20 years ago by 
Lord Curzon, important results have been achieved in 
the case of certain crops such as wheat, sugarcane, cotton 
(to which you specially refer) and jute, results which 
have led to a wide increase in the country’s wealth.

But where much has been done, much yet remains to 
do ; and it will I presume be the duty of the Commission 
to review existing conditions and to examine how best the 
discoveries of modern science and modern administrative 
methods can be harnessed to Agriculture’s needs. They 
will no doubt consider, among other matters, the most 
effective organization of research work ; the best means 
of ensuring a supply of trained workers in laboratory 
and field ; and of bringing home to cultivators fully proved 
results ; the maintenance of the purity of selected seed 
and its distribution ; as well as the vital question of the 
provision of the adequate funds. And, while advising 
measures to secure the greatest co-ordination of effort 
between the governments in India, it will be their duty 
to keep steadily in view the preservation of the newly 
gained independence of the Provinces in this branch of 
public administration. 

Their task, therefore, is difficult, but they will be supported by the good-will of all who recognise that if the Commission can point the way to a wider application of 
modern methods to agriculture, the benefits will not be 
confined to those who till the soil, but must lead to a 
general increase of national prosperity. 

Their recommendations will be made during my time 
in India, and I shall count myself fortunate if I can at 
all assist in the progressive amelioration of the conditions of the rural population. 

You refer also in the course of your Address to questions affecting trade, finance, and taxation. I can assure the Chamber that these questions will have my earnest 
attention, and I had looked forward to discussing them, 
on my arrival, with Sir Leslie Wilson. I greatly regret 
his absence and deplore the cause that has made it necessary. I am sure I express the feelings of everyone present here to-day when I say how deeply we feel for him in his 
anxiety, and I pray God that Lady Wilson may soon recover 
her health and be able to return to you. At present I am 
not in possession of the latest detailed information in 
regard to the important matters dealt with in this section 
of your Address, and you will not therefore ask me to do 
more than give you an assurance as I gladly do, that when 
I have equipped myself with the knowledge necessary to 
fuller understanding, I shall do all that may be within my 
power to encourage the trade and to further the prosperity 
of this great and famous City. 

In conclusion, Gentlemen, let me again express to you 
my thanks for the warmth of the welcome you have extended to Lady Irwin and myself, on the eve of our 
assumption of new and exacting responsibilities. It will be 
our constant desire to make acknowledgment of your good 
wishes, by losing no occasion of rendering the best service 
that we may to India and to all classes of her people. 

