
Title: CONFERMENT OF HONORARY DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF LAWS FROM BOMBAY UNIVERSITY
Speaker: Lord Hardinge
Audience: Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor of Bombay University
Date: 3 April 1916
Location: Mumbai
Notes: The Vice-Chancellor and Chancellor each made a speech prior to Hardinge's. The chancellor of was Lord Willingdon, a later Viceroy.
Additional Audiences: Members of the Viceroy's Executive Council, Indian princes and other dignitaries

Speech: 

Your Excellency, Mr, Vice-Chancellor and Gentlemen,— It is with deep emotion that I have listened to 
the words of your Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor, and 
I do not think it would become me to remain the silent 
recipient of the very great and rare honour that the 
Bombay University has been pleased to do me; and 
though my efforts to express my thanks and appreciation 
can only be halting as compared with the feelings that 
overcome me, I trust that you will make excuses for me 
and believe that my gratitude is profound and heartfelt. 

Your University is and always has been a most 
distinguished seat of learning. It has counted among its 
Chancellors such men as Sir Richard Temple, Lord Reay 
and Lord Sydenham; and among its Vice-Chancellors (to 
mention but a few) there have been men such as Sir 
Alexander Grunt, Sir Raymond West and Sir Ramkrishna 
Bhandarkar. It is to me a great honour to be brought 
on to the rolls of a University which has been under the 
control of men so distinguished as these. I consider 
it a very especial distinction to be classed in the roll of 
your Honorary Doctors of Law, for I find that this 
Honorary Degree has, since the University was founded, 
been bestowed on five persons only, and it is a great 
satisfaction to me to find myself in so select and so 
eminent a company of remarkable men as the Honorary 
Doctors of Law of the Bombay University. 

Among these is one but lately passed away, whose 
memory is treasured by India, I mean the late Lord 
Ripon. It was my privilege to enjoy his friendship and 
to know at first-hand something of that sagacious outlook, 
and wise and kindly heart that earned for him in India 
the love of her people and at home, after his retirement, 
the confidence and affection of his Sovereign and of those 
entrusted with the highest positions of power and responsibility in England. 

Upon him two and thirty years ago it pleased your 
predecessors to confer the same high honour that you have 
just, with so much demonstration of kindly feeling, 
conferred upon me, and my heart is indeed filled with 
pride that I should have been able to follow in his footsteps in securing the same distinction, the same token of approval at your hands. 

I am grateful for the all too flattering words that have 
fallen from the mouth of that veteran educationist, your 
Vice-Chancellor. 

Dr. Mackichan has told you that he was present here 
32 years ago, and his name has been a household word 
in Indian education for generations of Viceroys. Fourteen years ago he was selected by one of Indians greatest Viceroys as a member of the Universities Commission, his 
evergreen youth finds him now once more your Vice-Chancellor, and I hope that his services may be retained by India while many another Viceroy comes and goes. 

Nor is it a small matter that I should have been 
admitted to this honourable Degree by my old friend. 
Lord Willingdon. I know how beloved he is by the whole 
of this Presidency, and I cannot tell you what a help 
and support it has been to me, through the past years 
of storm and stress to feel that I have been able to rely 
with absolute confidence on his abounding enthusiasm for 
all the highest interests of Bombay and of India, and 
upon his thorough loyalty of co-operation with myself 
and my Government.

In my estimation the highest function of a Viceroy is 
to listen with sympathetic ear so as to understand India’s 
hopes and aspirations and translate to England’s King 
and England’s people the throbbing heart that beats 
beneath India’s placid breast, and in the same way he 
must strive to make clearer to India the kindly feelings 
of earnest good-will and the sincere desire to do what is 
right in the sight of God that animates the less impulsive 
heart of England. And I should like to believe that, in 
the genuine sympathy I have felt and expressed throughout my time in India, India has been able to see and realise England’s real mind and heart towards her and 
has learned that it is good and true. 

And if the claim that Dr. Mackichan has made is 
justified that, in this action which your University has 
taken, it is expressing the united mind of educated India, 
I feel that I can leave your shores happy in the consciousness that I have been a successful intermediary between two countries that I love so well — my own dear country, 
and this India which has so tightly wound itself around 
my heart-strings, not only by her wonderful response to 
every call that I have made upon her, not only by her 
never-failing kindness towards me, but also by her deep 
sympathy with me in those private sorrows which God’s 
providence has called upon me to bear. 

Your Vice-Chancellor referred to the suspicions that 
have, from time to time, haunted the Indian mind that 
higher education was in danger; and if the charge be 
ever made that the Government of India have failed in 
their duty towards that aspect of India’s aspirations and 
ideals, I shall turn to his speech as a judgment of 
acquittal. 

I do not wish to enter into any detailed review of the 
recent educational policy of the Government of India, 
though I may mention that, during the past quinquennium, the annual expenditure on education has risen from about four and a half to seven and a half million pounds 
and the number of pupils by over a million and a half, 
while so far as University education is concerned, the 
number of students in arts and professional colleges has 
increased from under 30,000 to over 50,000, and the 
expenditure from 60 1/4 lakhs to over 91 lakhs. But this 
is not nearly enough. More Universities are urgently 
needed and more qualified professors and teachers are 
required for colleges and schools, and if real progress is 
desired these must be adequately remunerated. It seems 
to me that the educational issue in this country is entirely 
dependent upon finding the necessary funds to cope with 
the demand for learning, both literary and technical, and 
this financial problem will require to be grappled with 
as soon as our present preoccupations are removed, and I 
believe that any additional burden required for the successful dissemination of learning will be gladly borne by the people of India, whose thirst for education is one of 
the happiest auguries of the future. 

The ceremony I so recently performed of laying the 
foundation stone of the Benares Hindu University gave 
me an opportunity of declaring the faith that is in me 
regarding higher education. No one can deny the necessity for greater and more extended facilities, no one can dispute the importance of greater elasticity or doubt the 
wisdom of experimenting in new directions, and I think 
everyone will give us credit for realising the urgency of 
improving the environments in which the students prosecute their studies. Here in Bombay you have been in 
the van-guard of the advance, and I can congratulate you 
most warmly upon the completion of your scheme for the 
establishment of a Royal Institute of Science in this city, 
and the opening of a College of Commerce, while the sums 
that have been spent upon the Bacteriological Laboratory 
at Parel will enable it to function also as a Post-graduate 
School of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 

I shall not attempt to go into further detail, but I will 
only add that it was for me a piece of real good fortune 
which brought to birth a new Department of Education 
at the moment of my arrival, and the happy choice that 
placed at its head so versatile and able a Member as Sir 
Harcourt Butler. 

The charge of that Department is now committed to 
the trust of my friend Sir Sankaran Nair the ablest 
Indian I could find for the purpose, and whatever temporary slowing down of the pace may be necessitated by the exigencies of finance owing to this devastating war, 
I feel confident that, in his hands and under the guidance 
of your new Viceroy, who has earned such a well-deserved 
reputation in educational circles at home, the interests 
of education are in the safest possible keeping for the 
next five years. During that period much progress will, 
I trust, be achieved in education as well as in the political 
development of this land, I often feel that, when I 
return to England, one of my chief endeavours should 
be to make the British public appreciate the pace at which 
India is developing both socially and politically, and that 
it is vain and useless to regard India from the standpoint 
of what India was ten years ago. When I look back 
upon the past 5 1/2 years, I am struck by the fact how much 
bigger India looms in the world than before, how she has 
grown in stature and in wisdom, and how her political 
progress and social regeneration have advanced, and are 
already bearing fruit with the prospects of an abundant 
harvest. The Morley-Minto reforms, in conceding to 
Indian politicians a larger share in the control of their 
own affairs, have opened a door to political progress that 
can never be closed so long as the advance is made on sure 
and safe lines. That the situation has immensely improved through the closer co-operation of the Government and the people is undeniable, and nowhere is this more 
appreciable than in Bombay, and there is no reason why 
with moderation and responsive sympathy this improvement should not be maintained. But it must be 
recognised that India cannot, and will not, remain 
stationary, and that it is the task of the Imperial Government to guide her development and to help her to attain her just and legitimate aspirations. 

There is but little more for me to say, but as I look 
back on the joys and the sorrows and the strenuous labour 
of the past 5 1/2 years, I am filled with a deep regret that 
the moment has come for me to close the book that has 
been of such enthralling interest. 

It has pleased my Sovereign to express his approval 
of my work, and I have received from every quarter 
innumerable tokens of affection and esteem, and it almost 
overwhelms me that you, who have the right to voice 
the feelings of educated India, should have thus bestowed 
upon me the highest compliment that it is within your 
power to pay. 

The inscription of my name upon the rolls of your 
University is one of the proudest incidents of my life, 
and to my dying day I shall treasure the memory of the 
wonderful reception you have given me and the warmth 
of kindly feeling wherewith you have clothed the gift 
of this great honour. I cannot tell you how highly I 
prize it. 

In bidding you good-bye let me once more express to 
you my feelings of profound gratitude and let me assure 
you that, whatever fate the future may have in store for 
me, the boyish interest I ever had in India has grown 
to be a tree of strong affection- And that I shall not be 
backward to seize whatever chance may come my way to 
serve her interests to the utmost of my power. My last 
word to the University of Bombay is a prayer that God 
may speed you in your task of spreading the light of true 
culture and uplifting the people whose soul and spirit is 
so largely committed to your care. 

Finally, may I make a still further claim on your 
patience while I address from these academic precincts 
a few words not only to the students of this University
in which I now hold an honoured position, but also to the 
students of all India, in the welfare of all of whom I 
take the deepest interest. I wish to give them this parting message from a true friend ; — 

"In a few hours’ time I shall have left you, my work 
in India being over, but I shall carry away with me 
memories and interests which will endure throughout my 
life. Above all, I shall carry away with me high hopes 
for the future of India, of which the fulfilment rests 
largely with you students who will soon be the manhood 
of your country. I have to bid you good-bye and Godspeed in solemn times which are putting to a supreme test not merely the military organisation and material 
resources, but above all the character of nations, their 
capacity for self-discipline and self-sacrifice. Herein 
lies the lesson of the war which I would commend to all 
the young students of India. It is character, it is the 
capacity for self-discipline, for self-sacrifice, that build 
up and preserve a nation. Cultivate those qualities 
steadfastly, patiently, unobtrusively, while you are 
pursuing your various studies, and you will then be able 
to acquit yourselves as men in after-life, and to do each 
of you your share in building up a nation worthy of 
India’s past traditions and future greatness. You will 
often be in my thoughts, and I trust you will also 
remember me as your sincere well-wisher. 

God bless you all and help you through life.” 