
Title: REPLY TO FAREWELL ADDRESS PRESENTED BY THE DELHI MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE
Speaker: Lord Mountbatten
Audience: Delhi Municipal Committee
Date: 20 June 1948
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This speech was made in Hindusthani from "my wife..and thanks." The rest was made in English.After "best of our return" he reads the farewell broadcast which is late speech 2 and then in the following paragraph beginning "Although all of you..."
Additional Audiences:

Speech:



My wife and I are quite overcome by the wonderful 
reception this great gathering has given us. We have 
come to bid you farewell and to tell you how sorry we are to 
be leaving you. Our hearts will remain with you always. 

My Hindi is not good enough to enable me to make the 
whole speech in Hindi. I will, therefore, now continue in 
English and a translation in Hindi will be read to you as soon 
as I have finished. 

Once more all our very best wishes and thanks. 



I need hardly say what a thrilling experience it is to be 
here today and to see the enormous crowds who have 
gathered here to greet us. But I must, first of all, thank you, 
Mr. President, for the very kind way you have received my 
wife and me and for the most generous and flattering phrases 
in which you have referred to our work out here. I must also 
thank you for the beautiful map of India holding the silver 
scroll in which the address has been put and surmounted by 
the ivory statue of Gandhiji. As I have said on other occasions, all of you have been so kind and friendly to us during 
our fifteen months stay that it would not have been possible 
for us to have done anything but to give of our best in return. 




Although all of you in this vast audience here, which I 
am told numbers well over one hundred thousand, have been 

able to hear what I have said in English and will shortly hear 
its translation into Hindustani, there are crores of people in 
the country to whom I would wish to speak in similar words, 
and I am therefore arranging to broadcast this speech through 
All-India Radio at 8:30 this evening. In conclusion, therefore, may I say on behalf of my wife and myself, thank you 
and all good fortune to you personally and to India in the 
future. 
