
Title: SWEARING-IN CEREMONY
Speaker: Lord Mountbatten
Audience: People of India
Date: 24 March 1947
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This was made in front of leaders of India and there is an accompanying photo from 2 days before of Mountbatten with Liaquat Ali Khan and Jawaharlal Nehru
Additional Audiences:

Speech:

Although I believe it is not unusual for a speech to be 
made at the swearing-in ceremony, I should like to say 
a few words to you, and to India. 

This is not a normal Viceroyalty on which I am embarking. His Majesty’s Government are resolved to transfer 
power by June 1948; and since new constitutional arrangements must be made, and many complicated questions of 
administration resolved—all of which will take time to put 
into effect—this means that a solution must be reached within 
the next few months. 

I believe that every political leader in India feels, as I do, 
the urgency of the task before us. I hope soon to be in close 
consultation with them; and I will give them all the help I can. 

In the meanwhile, every one of us must do what he can 
to avoid any word or action which might lead to further 
bitterness or add to the toll of innocent victims. I know how 
very many there are who are determined to work to that end, 
and I shall do everything I can to support them. 

I have many Indian friends. Some were made when I 
was out here twenty-five years ago—it was here in Delhi that 
my wife and I became engaged. In the three years that I was 
with the South-East Asia Command I made many more 
among the Indian fighting forces, with whom I am so proud 
to have been associated. 

It will be no easy matter to succeed Lord Wavell, who 
had done so much to take India along the path to self-government. I have always had a great admiration for him, and I shall devote myself to finishing the work which he began. 

I am under no illusion about the difficulty of my task. 
I shall need the greatest goodwill of the greatest possible 
number, and I am asking India to-day for that goodwill.