
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Irwin
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 18 April 1931
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Your Excellencies, Your Highnesses, Ladies and 
Gentlemen — Lady Irwin and I have had during the last 
few weeks to take many sad farewells. The final parting, 
the saddest of all, has now come, and a few brief moments 
are all that is left of five years which, if they have been 
laborious, I can truly say have been not less a labour of 
love. To Sir Frederick Sykes, who has given himself unsparingly to the service of this Presidency, to you, Your Highnesses, and to you, ladies and gentlemen, who have 
gathered here to bid us good-bye, our thanks are due for 
thus speeding us on our way. To the Corporation of 
Bombay, to whose generous words we have just listened, 
we are more than grateful for their kindness. It is fitting 
that this last address in India should come from the body 
responsible for the welfare of this great and beautiful 
seaport, and beneath the shadow of the Gateway where so 
many players upon the stage of India "have their exits 
and their entrances".

Of the particular matters, important as they are, concerned with the administration of this city or of India I do not propose, at the very moment of my departure, to 
speak, except to say that any question which touches the 
welfare of town or country, of Indians in India or Indians 
overseas, has always had, and will always command, my 
unfailing sympathy. An equal sympathy, as I am sure 
you know, is Lady Irwin’s, and I would join her name 
with mine in all that we can express of gratitude and 
good-will to this land and to its people. India, and not 
least Bombay, has good cause to welcome back to her 
shores two of India’s truest friends, Lord and Lady 
Willingdon, who, as all here know, will devote once more 
to this country qualities of understanding and sympathy 
which are theirs in no common measure, and for which 
there was never greater need. 

From the day I landed in India five years ago, I 
knew that my main task — apart from the day-to-day work 
of administration — would be concerned with the investigation which was to be the first step in the building of a new constitution for India, and with the subsequent stages 
through which these grave matters would have to pass. 
As to whether the estimate I have made from time to 
time of Indian opinion, or the advice I have given to His 
Majesty’s Government upon this subject, has proved right 
or wrong, or whether the methods employed by one side 
or another have been justified by the result, it is still too 
early to pronounce. We have been faced with difficulties, 
some that we might have foreseen and perhaps avoided, 
some that were inherent in the conditions with which we 
have to deal. The judgment of all this must be left to 
the cold and impartial gaze of history, by the verdict of 
which for my own part I am well content to abide. But 
one thing I have never doubted, and if my memory serves 
me I have more than once affirmed, that the only way of 
achieving the end, which I believe we all desire, was by 
a synthesis of the best statesmanship of East and West, 
by the collaboration of two partners working side by side, 
not in any huckstering spirit as to who would get the 
best of a hard bargain, not with a view to this or that 
individual or this or that community gaining an advantage 
or victory over a rival, but with the sole purpose of 
creating and perpetuating a prosperous, strong and contented India embracing both British India and the States as an honoured member of the British Commonwealth of 
Nations. 

The end of that task; as you have said, is not yet. 
Though much has been accomplished, the stiffest part of the 
hill is yet, I think, to come. To none of us is it given to 
cast a true horoscope of the future, or to foresee clearly 
the final shape of the great design, on which for a while 
we are set to labour. The work of any man, or of any 
generation of men, is a small factor in the evolution of a 
nation, and will surely be weighed in larger balances than 
we know. The ultimate issue of that for which we are 
jointly striving lies indeed in other and wiser hands, but 
I know that my own hope and confidence in its attainment 
is shared by that old and trusted friend of India, to whom 
I am now handing over my duties and responsibilities. 
Under Providence may he guide India to peace and happiness. 

In front of The Viceroy's House in New Delhi stands 
a column, presented by the late Maharaja of Jaipur, on 
which are inscribed the words : — 

"In Thought Faith 
In Word Wisdom. 

In Deed Courage 

In Life Service 

So may India be great." 

I can wish India nothing better, and so I would say- to you 
and to all those in this country that I have tried to serve, 
“ In your thinking, in your speaking, and in your doing, 
God be with you.” 