
Title: DINNER AT BELVEDERE
Speaker: Lord Lansdowne
Audience: Members of Calcutta High Society
Date: 24 January 1894
Location: Kolkata
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences: Sir Charles Elliott the Lieutenant Governor of Bengal, Lady Elliott

Speech: 

Your Honor, Ladies and Gentlemen,— Some of the 
guests, whom His Honor has asked to meet us must, I am 
afraid, be growing weary of the sound of my voice. I feel 
that my case may seem to you like that of an actor who 
does not know when to retire from the stage, and who, 
after he has taken his benefit, cannot resist the temptation of making one more appearance upon the boards. But if I were to make any number of farewell speeches, I should still leave unsaid much that is in my heart and Lady Lansdowne's, for on such occasions as these there 
are many words which must remain unspoken to the last 
It is the things we feel rather than the things we say 
which really bind together those who bid farewell and 
those to whom farewell is bidden. I cannot thank Sir 
Charles Elliott sufficiently for the generous and friendly words in which he has proposed the toast of our health. We shall preserve the pleasantest recollections of Belvedere and of its occupants, of the graceful hostess, always bright, kindly and hospitable, who has so often and 
so cordially welcomed us. Sir Charles himself has been 
my colleague in Council during the first years of my term 
of office, and we have had many a hard hour's work together as well as many a climb side by side on the steep hill sides of Simla. At this moment he is the head of a 
local Government with which the Government of India is 
constantly in contact — a local Government the chief of 
which fills, I sometimes think, the most arduous and difficult post in the public service, I feel, now that I am setting my face homewards for a quiet haven of rest, as 
if I were deserting an old comrade in arms, and leaving 
him to face alone the hurlyburly of Indian political life, in 
which we have so often stood shoulder to shoulder.

Ladies and Gentlemen,— Those of us who have not forgotten the old books which we used to read at school, will remember that there was once a time when, if the death 
struggle of some poor mortal was too painful and too prolonged, the gods above sent down from heaven in their mercy a winged messenger to put an end to his sufferings. 
In my case the messenger of the gods is very near at hand. 
In our fancy we can almost hear the fall of his footsteps 
as he ascends the broad stairs of Government House. In 
a few hours all will be over, and it is therefore fitting that, 
in these closing moments of my official life, I should bid 
you all good-bye, and thank you yet once again for the 
happiness which you have given us while that life lasted. 
