
Title: EXTEMPORE SPEECH AT A FAREWELL BANQUET GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE CABINET AT GOVERNMENT HOUSE, NEW DELHI
Speaker: Lord Mountbatten
Audience: Prime Minister (Jawaharlal Nehru) and the Cabinet of Ministers
Date: 20 June 1948
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This speech was made following a speech by Nehru
Additional Audiences:

Speech:



This is a very inspiring moment in the lives of the Mountbattens. It is also a very sad moment. Everything that 
the Prime Minister has said has made us feel that the moment 
is as inspiring as it is sad. I don’t want to use the trite phrase 
that everything he said has been flattery, because I know that 
he speaks only what he feels, that is why the unprepared 
phrases he has used are more precious to me than any prepared peroration which hadn’t got the same degree of sincerity behind it. 

Here on our last night in India we are surrounded by 
familiar faces. The faces of our friends. Here tonight there 
are old friends such as His Highness of Bhopal, one of my oldest friends in India. There are new friends, such as we have 
made recently. There are Ruling Princes such as His Highness of Bundi who fought under my command in South-East 
Asia. There are the Ambassadors, Ministers and High Commissioners who represent their various countries in Delhi. 
There are the Commander-in-Chiefs and the Senior Officers 
of the Armed Forces in India. There are representatives of 
the Civil Service in the highest positions, and last there are 
our hosts tonight. 

I have put them last because hosts usually wish to put 
themselves last; it is for that reason and no other for our hosts 
are the Prime Minister and the Ministers of the Government 
of India. As Viceroy it was my privilege to preside at the 
meetings of the Cabinet. I arrived on the evening of a budget 
crisis. I was warned by Lord Wavell that the next meeting 
of the Cabinet could not fail to be very difficult. Well, Ladies 


and Gentlemen, that meeting of the Cabinet was not difficult, 
because of the kindness and the consideration which the 
Ministers showed to a “‘ new boy ” in a difficult job. It was 
from that evening onwards I knew that I had come among 
friends. 

It is hard to pick out individually all one’s friends, particularly as so many have become such close ones; our hostess 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, that dear sweet person who covers 
up her business-like efficiency and competence under a cloak 
of charm; my successor Mr. Rajagopalachari, the wise and 
elder statesman of India who is eminently fitted in every way 
to be the first Indian to hold this high office. He has such a 
delightful sense of humour, even in the letters that we have 
been writing to each other on business. 

I was warned before I came to India that I should meet 
my match in a very “ tough guy”, Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel; but when we met I came to the conclusion that he 
could not be quite as tough as the act that he put on. He is 
so very apparently hard and firm and unyielding, and I think 
he is like that because he doesn’t want the world to know what 
a very warm heart beats behind that rugged exterior, and I 
regard him as one of the greatest friends I have made here, 
and am sad that he can’t be with us tonight. 

About the Prime Minister it is difficult to speak for the 
exact complimentary reasons that he has mentioned. He has 
become such a friend of the whole Mountbatten family that 
we shall be lonely when we leave India and are without him, 
but I share entirely the view he has already expressed that 
the friendship that has counted the most during our time out 
here, has been the friendship of the ordinary man and woman 
in the street, and in the fields. It is almost inexplicable to us 
why they should have taken so kindly to us except that we 
felt a tremendous reciprocal feeling of friendship towards 
them. The most touching and quite unbelievable things have 
happened. Refugees have collected together their pies and 
their annas in order that one of their number might travel 
sometimes a journey of twenty-four hours or even forty-eight 
hours to bring up some of the gifts they have made as a token 


to my wife and that they were pleased with what she did. 
And the people in the streets today were so very friendly—an 
experience I shall never forget as long as I live. 

I could go on talking like this a long while, but I should 
only be repeating myself. What I am trying to say is that we 
are desperately sorry to be leaving India. In less than ten 
hours from now our physical bodies will go, but our hearts 
will always remain here. 

I would now like to refer to this tray that has just been 
given us. Ladies and Gentlemen, this is no ordinary tray. I 
doubt whether in history all the Cabinet Ministers of a great 
Central Government and all the Governors of the Provinces of 
a great sub-continent have joined together to have their 
names inscribed on one object like this. It makes it of a value 
quite beyond computation, and will always remain by far the 
most historic heirloom of the Mountbatten family. I thank 
the Ministers and the Governors on behalf of my wife, and my 
daughter and myself most heartily for this gift. 

When I was last in London, the King said that he wanted 
to give some gift when we left to the Government and people 
of India, and we discussed what form this could take. I 
reminded His Majesty that there was in this house a set of 
gold plate, or rather heavily silver gilt plate which had been 
given personally to his father by the Worshipful Company of 
Goldsmiths and Silversmiths, one of the ancient city companies, which had been specially designed and built with the 
approval of King George V to fit into the State dining-room 
at New Delhi, and which he gave for use in the house of his 
Viceroy. It is His Majesty’s own personal property to do with 
as he pleases, and it is his particular desire to give this in 
token of friendship, not only on behalf of himself, but as a 
symbol of the friendship of all English men and women and 
indeed of all the people in the United Kingdom to the people 
of India. 

I shall now draw aside our two national flags which 
cover the plate in token of transferring it to my successor and 
to the Government of India, as a gift. 