
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Chelmsford
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 4 April 1916
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address and the address being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, — I thank you for your 
cordial welcome to India and the good wishes you have 
expressed in your address. 

No one is more conscious than I am of the many and 
varied problems which present themselves in this great land, 
and I am grateful for the promise of support which is contained in your address. 

I deem myself fortunate in having resided for some sixteen 
months in this country prior to my assumption of office. 

I do not suggest that I am thereby equipped at once to 
grapple with India’s problems, but it has at least given me 
an opportunity of observing Indian aspirations and requirements from an angle of vision not often vouchsafed to a Viceroy. 

I am glad of your tribute to the work of the British Navy. 
My arrival in Bombay in 1914 was coincident with the 
destruction of the Emden by His Majesty’s Australian ship 
Sydney, and I can well recollect the relief expressed generally 
in Bombay and in India on that occasion.

You allude to the important question of agricultural and 
industrial development in India. 

As you say, Lord Hardinge has taken the first step 
towards inaugurating an inquiry into the industries of India, 
and the methods required for fostering and developing 
them. 

Without being so presumptuous as to indicate a line of 
policy within a few minutes of my arrival, I think I may 
assure you that any well-thought-out scheme of developing 
India’s industries will have my whole-hearted support, not 
only because I regard it as incumbent upon every part of 
the Empire to do its best to repair the ravages of this 
terrible war, but because I look forward to the day when India 
will not only produce its raw material, but will be in a position 
to convert that raw material into finished articles for its own 
and the world’s consumption. 

You allude to certain other matters which affect trade 
arising out of the war. You will not expect me to reply to 
them, and I have a shrewd suspicion that your purpose has 
been served by including them in your address. 

Gentlemen, I thank you. 
