
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Elgin
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 20 January 1894
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is available in the book.
Additional Audiences: Commander-in-Chief of Bombay, members of the Governor's Council, judges of the high court, other civil and military officials and dignitaries

Speech: 

Mr . President and Gentlemen, — I have to return you my 
very warmest thanks for the kind and cordial terms of the 
address you have just read and the welcome you have given 
me to Indian soil. I am one whose respect for Municipal 
institutions is based on some experience of the services they 
render to the health and happiness of the community. It is 
well known that the Municipality of Bombay has recognised its duty in this respect and has carried it out with efficiency, and I venture to assure you of my ready sympathy in your patriotic labours. (Applause.) Gentlemen, your welcome to this ancient and famous city, recalling the words of encouragement from ancient Municipalities in my own country, is especially gratifying to me at a moment 
which I conceive no man can approach unmoved. Your geographical position gives you the opportunity of meeting, at the outset of their career, the men to whom Her Majesty 
from time to time, entrusts the arduous duties of Viceroy of 
India, and not only that, but also when they pass through 
here before leaving the threshold for the last time. I thank 
you for the kindness with which you have received me. I 
cannot tell what may have been the feeling of my distinguished predecessors, but I imagine no one can approach this moment without some sense of the coming responsibilities. For my own part the varied responsibilities, to which in fitting terms you have called my attention, would appear 
well-nigh overwhelming, were it not for the generous confidence you have expressed in me. You indicate the best means by which I can justify that confidence when you 
invite care and diligence in the consideration of the incidents 
which affect the Government and the people. This only, 
therefore, will I permit myself to say that it will be my 
earnest hope and endeavour so to assist the able men with 
whom I shall be associated in dealing with and regulating the 
questions now pending, or which may hereafter come up 
for disposal, as to not only advance the material prosperity of 
this country, but to secure and conserve its rights to every 
class of Her Majesty’s subjects. (Applause.) 

Mr. President, I observe with great satisfaction in your 
address the full and ample recognition of what after all is 
the strongest bond of union and chief security — our common 
loyalty to the Queen-Empress. You say truly that that 
loyalty is based on an affection which Her Majesty knows 
how to inspire in every part of her dominions, because we 
know how it is reciprocated by herself. That loyalty, if it 
is not a mere loyalty of the lips, imposes its duties on every 
individual and upon every class of the community, and it 
is, therefore, a great satisfaction to me that I have your 
assurance, not only speaking for yourselves of this great 
city, but expressing the general sentiment, that in the performance of my duties as a servant of the Crown I shall have the support of a loyal people devoted to the Government of her beloved Sovereign. 

Gentlemen, you have referred in feeling sentences to the 
services of my father. I confess it is a matter of some 
pride to me that I am the first in a now lengthening roll 
of Viceroys who might advance his hereditary claim to your regard. It is additionally gratifying that you have recognised this, and endorsed it in a manner which will 
add another incentive to me to follow in my father’s footsteps. I venture to hope that no act of mine will do aught to depose the name I bear from the honourable position it 
holds in the memory of India. (Loud applause.) 

I have only in conclusion to thank you sincerely for the 
good wishes expressed regarding Lady Elgin and myself. 
If I venture to join in the hope that health may be vouchsafed to us, it is that we may have the same energy to devote to your service. I thank you again for the splendid 
reception you have given me to-day, and I assure you that 
the interests of the city and of the inhabitants of Bombay 
will ever be our concern. (Loud applause.) 
