
Title: LAYING THE FOUNDATION STONE OF THE NEW MUNICIPAL HALL, BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Ripon
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 19 December 1884
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Your Excellency, Mr. Mehta, and Members of the 
Corporation of Bombay,- I can assure you, gentlemen of 
the Bombay Corporation, that I have received with great 
gratification the address which you have presented to me 
upon this interesting occasion, and that I rejoice to have 
taken a part in the ceremony of to-day, and to have borne 
my share in laying the first stone of the new Municipal 
Buildings of this great and important city. In all countries in which municipal institutions have flourished, as in Italy and in Flanders in the middle ages,- municipal buildings 
have invariably formed one of the most important architectural features of the cities in which they have been erected. And so it ought to be here in India, where I 
anticipate for municipal institutions a great and brilliant 
future. It is right that here the importance of those 
institutions should be marked by the character of the buildings which are devoted to their objects. And certainly if that ought to be the case in other parts of India, more 
especially should it be so here in Bombay — in this city so 
rich in beautiful specimens of architecture. I am very 
glad indeed, therefore, to have had an opportunity at your 
request of taking a part in to-day’s ceremony. Gentlemen, 
as you have reminded me in your address, the Corporation 
of Bombay was the first public body which welcomed me 
upon my arrival in India in the year 1880. I well remember 
that occasion, and I recollect how much I was struck by 
the address which I then received, and by the mien and 
bearing of those who presented it to me. Gentlemen, I 
was thereby led to make early inquiries into the constitution of your Corporation and the character of the work in which you were engaged. These inquiries soon convinced 
me that, at all events under favourable circumstances, the 
people of this country were well able to conduct the 
management of their own local affairs with credit to those 
who manage them and with advantage to their fellow-citizens. From that conviction arose in my mind the first conception of that policy for the farther development and 
extension of self-government which I, with the assistance 
of my colleagues, have since pursued. And I might say of 
you, without any invidious comparison with other cities, 
that, so far as I am concerned in this matter, you have 
been for me, according to the motto of your city, Prima 
in Indis. (Cheers.) What I had seen and heard in Bombay led me to call for further information as to the extent and the wording of municipal institutions throughout the 
country generally, and especially of those which had in 
them an elective element. I soon discovered that there 
was in regard to the extent of the powers and the constitution of the institutions of that kind in this country great diversities and anomalies which appeared to me to be 
somewhat singular. I found, for instance, that in the 
great Presidency of Bombay outside this city no elective 
municipality at that time existed at all. I found that in 
Bengal, outside Calcutta there were only three such municipalities ; while the North-West Provinces and Oude alone out of the 107 municipalities, 72 enjoyed in a measure the 
elective franchise ; and in the Central Provinces, not generally supposed to be a very advanced portion of the country, 60 municipalities, out of 61, were endowed with 
the right of election. Throughout India the law recognised 
the spread of the elective system, and it had clearly been, 
as it seemed to me, the object and intention of the Legislature. that that system should be gradually but steadily extended. But, as I have said, its practical application 
was most unequal, not indeed to say capricious. Well, 
gentlemen, while I was considering the results of the information which had been laid before me upon this subject, the time came round when the Government of India had 
to renew with the various provincial Governments those 
quinquennial contracts which were instituted by the late 
Lord Mayo. When we considered what steps we should 
take in connexion with the renewal of those contracts, it 
seemed to us that the time had certainly come when a 
further step in the direction of decentralization might be 
taken — a step contemplated and desired by Lord Mayo 
himself — and when that decentralization which had been established between the Government of India and the local Governments subject to it might be carried down 
from those local Governments to the various local bodies 
which existed throughout their jurisdiction. We determined to take that step, and to apply that principle of decentralization yet further throughout the country, in 
order that we might secure in the management of local 
affairs the co-operation of the best, the most intelligent, 
and the most trusted men in the country. (Cheers.) It 
was with this view, gentlemen, that the Resolution of the 
Government of the 18th May 1882 was issued. It is almost 
superfluous at this time of day, and after the discussions 
which have taken place, that I should remind you that we 
never dreamt of applying the full principles of that Resolution to every part of this great peninsula. Wc knew well enough that what might be, and would be, in our belief very suitable to the enlightened portions of the Presidency of Bombay or of the Province of Bengal, or the 
Presidency of Madras, might not be equally suitable, and 
would not be equally suitable to many less advanced portions of the country. Wc never thought of introducing any preconceived system of our own, devised in our own 
brains or copied from European examples ; we never 
proposed a uniform, still less a very low, franchise. On 
the contrary, what we desired and sought for was variety 
in the application of our principles and the careful application of the system with due regard to the peculiar circumstances of each province and each locality. We desired to leave, and we have everywhere left, as much as possible, the application of those principles to the local 
Governments; and I am glad to say that with their co-operation the results already attained have been marked and important. Here, In Bombay, you of the Bombay 
Corporation have at the present moment 24 sister elective 
municipalities, where you had none in 1880; and you will 
ere long have many more. In Bengal, where, as I said, 
four years ago there were 3 elective municipalities, 
there are now 170; again, in the Punjab, where there were 
3 in 1880, there are now 122; and in the North-West 
Provinces and Oude, advanced though they were at that time in this respect, 72 elective municipalities have grown to 97 ; while the organization of local boards is proceeding 
throughout the country, and proceeding, I have every 
reason to believe, in a very satisfactory manner in this 
Presidency. As I had occasion to mention yesterday, I 
have the highest official authority for stating that the 
results of those elections which have been already realised 
arc of a very satisfactory character. (Cheers.) Such, 
gentlemen, is the portion of success which our policy 
in this respect has already attained, and we know 
that before many months are over, the measures which 
have been passed and which have now become law in all 
parts of the country will receive yet fuller application, 
and be brought into more complete operation. It remains, 
therefore, gentlemen, for these local bodies themselves to 
justify the policy which has called them into existence. 
The Government has shown the confidence which they 
repose in the people of this country, their readiness to 
entrust to them a larger share in the administration of 
their local affairs, and their desire to train them more and 
more for the discharge of public duties. It is for you to 
show that in these endeavours we have been right. I 
know, gentlemen, that there are those who speak of this 
policy of developing local self-government in India as 
premature. Now, a long experience of public life has 
taught me that when the opponents of any change do not 
know by what direct arguments openly to resist any 
proposed measure of progress, they are apt to say that 
it is premature. (Laughter and cheers.) And when that argument is brought forward my experience has further taught me that the controversy has generally reached its 
last stage — (renewed cheers) — and that the matter solvitur ambulando. You have only got to take the step which is called premature to prove by its success that the 
charge is wholly unfounded. So, I have every confidence 
it will be here in India under the wise and sympathetic 
guidance of your present Viceroy. (Cheers.) The foundation which has been laid is solid ; it will be for the people themselves to erect upon that foundation, not merely a 
building made with hands, such as that of which we have 
laid the first stone to-day, but a noble superstructure of 
good work done, of education extended, of sanitation 
advanced, of communications improved, of sickness alleviated, which will form a monument more enduring than marble for those who have laboured together for the public 
good. Gentlemen, it only remains for me to bid you 
heartily farewell. My thoughts from my English home 
will often turn to India, and it will ever be my most 
earnest prayer that it may please that God who rules beneficently over men of all nations and all races to shower down upon you His choicest blessings. (Loud cheers.) 