
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Lansdowne
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 3 December 1888
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. President and Members of the Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay,— I thank you heartily for 
the generous and cordial terms in which you have welcomed me ; and I can assure you that we shall long remember the manner in which you have received us within 
your city. Sir, I shall not allow myself to forget that the 
courtesy which you have extended to me is not an indication, entirely or mainly, of personal feeling towards myself, I believe it to be the manifestation of a feeling which I 
have no doubt is prevalent throughout British India, and 
which I am sure is prevalent in the city of Bombay, — a 
feeling of loyalty to the Queen-Empress, and of pride in 
membership of her Empire,— a feeling which leads you to 
avail yourselves gladly of any opportunity of assuring the 
person who happens to be Her Majesty’s representative 
of your sentiments of respect for him. At the same time, 
I think I should be wanting in frankness, as well as in gratitude, if I did not recognise in the words which you have used, some indication of personal interest and good-will 
towards myself. And I can assure you that, at the present 
moment, those expressions of your sentiments are, in my 
eyes, of the very utmost value ; for I can conceive no 
moment in the life of an Englishman more solemn than 
that in which he finds himself called upon to undertake the 
great task which is about to be committed to my hands. 
Whether he looks back towards the long line of illustrious 
men who have preceded him, and asks himself if he 
will be given strength of mind and body to continue their 
work, or whether he looks forward to the many important 
questions which await solution at the hands of the Government of India, he must be infatuated if he does not recognise that he is about to submit himself to an ordeal as 
severe as that to which any public man can expect to go 
through. At such a moment, the words of encouragement 
such as you have addressed to me, sound most gratefully 
in his ears. Let me say also that I do not think there is 
any body of public men in this country who could express sentiments of that kind with greater weight and 
Authority than the Municipal Corporation of a great city such as yours,- a city whose historical associations are amongst the most interesting and remarkable in the annals 
of the country,— a city which in our own time has achieved 
for itself a position, intellectually and commercially, unsurpassed by that of any other city in this continent. Sir, I can assure you that any expressions of opinion on the 
part of the representatives of such a city shall receive my 
most careful and earnest attention. I did not fail to take 
note of what fell from you in regard to the success which 
has been achieved by the extension of a large measure of 
local self-government to your city. Municipal institutions 
are on their trial in the great cities of India, and I am prepared to find that the Municipal Corporation of Bombay has achieved results not likely to disappoint the most sanguine 
advocates of that great and salutary measure of reform. 
(Hear, hear.) I also noted what you said with regard to 
the duty which you believe attached to your Government, 
of securing this part of the Empire against danger from 
external attack. I entirely recognise that it is one of the 
first duties of your Government to render the Queen's possessions in this part of the world so secure as to give the utmost scope to the progress of all peaceful pursuits. In 
dealing with this and the other great questions which concern the Government of India, those who are connected with it have the great advantage of being assisted by a 
body of public servants unrivalled in the service of any 
Power in the world, in respect of their intelligence, ability, 
and what I might almost call their traditional aptitude for 
the conduct of public affairs. I trust that the support of 
that distinguished body of men will be extended to me as 
loyally as it has been given to my predecessors. But, Mr. 
President, I should be sorry to think that I was to depend 
merely upon the countenance and good-will of those who 
will be associated with me in the performance of official 
duties in this country. I trust that I may look for the 
sympathy and co-operation of the whole of the Queen's 
subjects in this part of India, whether official or non- 
official. You refer in graceful terms to the fact that 
Lady Lansdowne has undertaken to continue the admirable 
work inaugurated by the Marchioness of Dufferin in this 
country. Let me say for Lady Lansdowne, as well as for 
myself, that it will be our earnest wish to associate ourselves with you in ail your endeavours for the alleviation of distress, and for bringing within the reach of those who most require them, the appliances which science has devised for the relief of suffering humanity. You were also kind 
enough to refer, in passing, to my services under the Crown
in another part of the Empire. The contrast between 
Canada and India is a very marked and striking one. We 
have left a cold climate for a warm one. (Laughter.) We 
have left a country, most of which has been recently settled, for a country with a very ancient and historical civilization. We have left a country, in which self-governing 
institutions are fully developed, for one in which they are 
being tried with cautious and tentative steps in regard to 
purely local affairs. I trust, however, that in one respect 
I shall find a resemblance between Canada and India. I 
trust I shall find that here, as well as there, loyalty to the 
Crown, and attachment to the British Empire, are terms as 
well understood in the one country as I found them understood amongst those good friends with whom I passed the last five years of my life in Canada. 

Sir, I thank you very cordially for your address, and I 
may express my great admiration of the manner in which 
it has been enshrined. I accept it with the utmost gratitude, and thanks for the courtesy which you have extended to me. (Cheers.) 

