
Title: REPLY TO ADDRESS FROM THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Dufferin
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 12 December 1888
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen,— I am very sensible of 
your kindness in thus welcoming me again to your noble 
city — a city which, I am happy to think, has been continually increasing in splendour, in prosperity, and in wealth, under the joint auspices of your Governor’s conscientious 
wise, and painstaking administration, and the intelligent 
counsels of the Municipal Corporation. The solicitude of 
the Government of India, as you are aware, is in no sense 
confined to the limits of any particular province or city of 
the Empire. It watches with impartial interest over the 
welfare of the whole peninsula, and we have always considered it a fortunate circumstance when it has been 
within our power, either directly or indirectly, to embark 
on any line of policy which was consonant to the wishes 
or conducive to the well-being of the loyal and enterprising population of Bombay. It is a great satisfaction to me to know that the intelligent classes of this part of India 
comprehend the obligation of providing for the security of 
the north-west frontier. India is so large a place that 
the nature and force of those considerations which impose 
upon the Government any special line of action at one extremity of the Empire are scarcely appreciated or understood by those who live under different conditions at 
the other; but I think you may rest assured that the rulers 
of the country will never enter upon any expenditure, of a 
warlike character, whether with the view of being prepared 
against possible contingencies of a serious character, or of 
repelling casual incursions of hostile tribes, or of other 
enemies, except with extreme reluctance, and under the 
pressure of absolute necessity. In conclusion, allow me to 
thank you for the kind reference you have made to my 
wife’s endeavours to improve the condition of the women 
of India. The encomium you have passed upon her cannot fail to. be most gratifying to her feelings, and I at all events am at liberty to say that it is richly deserved ; for, 
not only will she have done an immense amount of actual 
good in the present, but she will have shown what a 
powerful engine sympathy, common-sense, and judicious 
management can prove in overcoming or turning those 
special impediments to progress which are peculiar to the 
soil of India. In bidding you good-bye, I beg again to 
express to you my earnest wishes for the prosperity and 
welfare of your city and of its inhabitants, as well as of the 
magnificent and powerful province of which it is the capital. (Cheers.) 


