
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S REPLY TO A FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE OF NEW DELHI ON THE 20TH MARCH 1947
Speaker: Lord Wavell
Audience: Municipal Committee of New Delhi
Date: 20 March 1947
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This is a reply address
Additional Audiences:

Speech:

On behalf of Her Excellency and myself I thank you 
most, sincerely for your farewell address. We much 
appreciate the kind things you have said of our work in 
India and your good wishes for the future. 

We have actually lived longer in New Delhi, at the 
Commander-in-Chief’s and Viceroy's Houses, than anywhere else since we were married. We shall for this and for other reasons always have very lively recollections of 
Delhi, of its historical monuments, of its amenities, and 
of its people. We have been deeply interested in all these 
and have often wished that we had had more leisure to 
study and enjoy them. For myself, perhaps the greater 
proportion of such leisure as I have had in Delhi has been 
spent on your excellent golf-course at Lodi, to which you 
referred, and in riding ground the outskirts of the city in 
the early morning. 

My morning rides have sometimes brought me in contact with your problems, as when the sudden appearance in my path of a deep trench and many pipes have called my 
attention to your problems of water-supply; or when I have 
seen new buildings growing up and realised the housing 
problem that confronted you. And on these rides I have 
always some architectural beauty of old buildings, or the 
horizon of New Delhi to admire. Even on Lodi golf-course 
some ancient tomb or the arresting outline of the Purana 
Kila have at times almost consoled me for a sliced drive or 
missed putt. 

I can assure you that I have watched your problems 
with close interest, and as far as possible have seen them 
for myself. I have sympathised with the extent of them: 
the continual growth of the population has required more 
housing, more food, more water, more electricity. I congratulate you on the standards you have maintained in spite of difficulties and shortages, and especially on the 
success which has attended the campaign against Malaria. 

One matter to which you referred when you gave me 
a message of welcome nearly 3 1/2 years ago was the removal 
of temporary buildings. I told you then that I was in full 
sympathy with your desire to have them removed as soon 
as possible. I still am, but I fear that the temporary 
buildings have increased rather than diminished, and that 
the shortage of accommodation leaves no hope of their all 
being pulled down yet awhile. But I am sure that you 
must keep this object in view, and must clear the sites 
now occupied by these temporary hutments to put up 
buildings in keeping with the original plan. 

You inferred to the especial need of housing for nurses 
and teachers. This is a question in which Her Excellency 
and myself have always been deeply interested and we hope 
that success will attend your efforts. 

You are charged with the important duty of looking 
after the welfare of this great city, which is destined to be, 
if all goes well, the principal capital in Asia. I give you 
my very best wishes for the future. I know my 
distinguished successor will do all he can to assist you. 

I thank you again for your good wishes. 