
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE INDIAN MERCHANTS' CHAMBER AND BUREAU BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Reading
Audience: Indian Merchants' Chamber and Bureau
Date: 3 April 1921
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Indian Merchants'
Chamber and Bureau . — Permit me to thank you very heartily 
on behalf of Her Excellency, as well as myself, for the cordial 
words of welcome you have been good enough to address to 
us and which we very much appreciate. It is encouraging on 
arrival to receive members of your Chamber who present 
a most carefully compiled general statement of political and 
economic grievances according to your views. Nevertheless 
you extend to me a hearty welcome. It is a satisfaction to 
find your views stated in plain and explicit terms in a document. I imagine that your object is to bring the various points to my notice. I should think you are far too shrewd 
to expect a reasoned answer to these political arguments at 
this moment. I have somewhere at the back of my mind 
a notion that if I did attempt it you would go away a little 
disappointed in me and say to each other ; “ well we did not 
think that His Excellency would have discussed some of the 
matters mentioned by us to-day.” Nevertheless I thank 
you for having stated your views so clearly ; and if I do not 
refer to each one of them in my few observations you will 
I am sure acquit me of any intentional discourtesy. But you 
will understand, as I stated publicly yesterday morning, 
I do not think it right that I should now express views upon 
political matters confronting the Government over which 
I preside, before I have had the proper opportunities of making 
myself personally acquainted with the situation. In other 
words, and speaking perhaps with a recollection of my judicial 
position I must hear all sides before I come to a decision. You 
would think very little, of one who proceeded to pronounce 
a view possibly framed in language to please you, but which 
nevertheless was not based upon his own judgment formed 
upon information and advice and knowledge that he had 
obtained. 

There are however two or three main subjects to which 
I think I may refer a little more in detail. You tell me that 
I arrive at a time when this country is passing through a critical period both politically and commercially. I have said enough, I hope, as regards the general political situation to 
show you that, although I shall consider very carefully every 
word that you say, I do not propose to deal with all the various 
matters which you have just stated. 

You, however, refer to commercial grievances with which 
you are more directly and intimately concerned I do not 
mean that you are not affected by the political situation, but 
being a Merchants’ Chamber you are specially charged with 
the interest of the Indian merchants. 

Will you forgive me for saying that you do not seem to me 
to attribute sufficient importance, as I understand the situation, to the various causes of exchange troubles and depreciated currency but are, not unnaturally, inclined to regard the 
problems as if they affected India alone and as if the causes 
of the serious dislocation of finance and trade and generally 
the economic situation were to be found in India alone — where- 
as in truth these same problems are affecting the whole world's 
prosperity. If you seek the remedy you must try to arrive 
at all the causes, and then you must not leave out of account 
the great world dislocation which is truly at the root of all the 
trade trouble with which we are confronted. Of course 
India has its own particular problems like every other country, 
but generally speaking, you cannot have vast countries engaged in the production of articles which are the least reproductive without the whole world's wealth and consequently its 
prosperity being gravely affected. During the war, as you 
are aware, trade and industry were diverted from ordinary 
channels and manufactures, instead of making articles for 
export to various countries, were turned into channels, 
essential during the war, but which nevertheless mostly ended 
in smoke and flame and created no wealth, but caused loss of 
the nation’s surplus wealth and of the means of exchange of one 
country’s product for that of another. These are world 
factors which one must not leave out of account. 

You go on to deal with the difficulties which have arisen 
and you refer to the depression which has actually occurred in 
India’s foreign trade owing, as you say, to the disorganisation 
of international exchange and the diminution in the purchasing 
power of India’s customers. Of course, you understand —  nobody better — that India’s trade depends upon world conditions and that until these have become more normal, as one 
hopes they speedily will, it is natural that customers for 
articles produced will not be able to resume their purchases, 
on the former scale. But I think we should all remember that 
India is especially fortunate in that her trade in the main is 
in necessities and not in luxuries, so that as soon as the world’s 
purchasing power begins to be restored, directly you get the 
equilibrium a little more normal, the products of India must 
be taken by the various countries as they are able to finance 
them. To you who are engaged daily in trade it is but a 
truism to say that if you export luxuries you must wait longer 
for a restoration of trade than when your trade is in those 
exports which people must purchase. I refer to these considerations not because they are an answer to your difficulties ; they are not, but because I suggest that you should not be 
unduly pessimistic. I am far from attempting to minimise 
the importance and seriousness of the situation but we must 
not be cast down by difficulties. It tends to encouragement 
and to the permanence of credit if we remember these opportunities for India’s restoration to the position it occupied until quite recently in relation both to currency and balance of trade. 

Generally speaking, I agree, and in fact merchants who 
understand their business all over the world have come to 
the same conclusion, that trade will find its own salvation as 
time progresses ; but I want you to bear in mind that I am 
the last person, with my experience during the war, to attribute little importance to depreciated exchange problems. On the contrary, I know they are very important indeed at 
present. 

Yet again, we must see root causes if we want to find the 
true remedies. A fall in exchange is in truth only a manifestation of a primary trouble. It is a symptom of the dislocation of the world’s trade and which applied to India is a mirror of 
the changed conditions of the balance of trade during recent 
times, attributable to the world causes to which I have referred 
as also to special causes affecting India. Nobody knows 
better than a body of gentlemen like yourselves that all nations 
are dependent on each other for trade. It is not only one nation 
that is affected by world upheaval but the whole world. But 
here again I am fully sensible of the importance of the observations that you make about the policy of the Government with  regard to Rupee exchange and also to the sale of Reverse 
Councils. I do not want to discuss them at this moment for 
the reasons that I have given ; I know that they have given 
rise to much discussion and controversy. I will only say 
that when you do consider the reasons of the fall in your 
exchange you must not attribute it entirely either to the one 
or the other condition, but must bear in mind the enormous 
change in the world’s position. You refer naturally to the 
war in which India behaved with such deep and devoted loyalty to the King-Emperor and to the cause for which we were fighting. Nothing was more splendid and I trust that nothing 
that ever happens will make us— British and Indians together 
regret that we struggled for great and high ideals which India 
took to her heart equally with ourselves. Whilst it is true 
that there have been disappointments after the war I am 
afraid these are inevitable. People cannot always live even 
in a spiritual country like India at the extreme height of 
noblest ideals since we fire only human beings ; but that we 
together, British and Indians, reached those altitudes should 
always be a bond between us. May I add one further word 
based upon much observation that notwithstanding the 
disappointment, at this moment I am convinced that as a 
result of the struggle for higher ideals the world will be the 
better, although it may not be apparent at this particular 
moment. There is disappointment aroused by these exchange 
and currency questions that have supervened after the war. 
I do not suggest that it is much comfort or consolation yet 
even here it is always well to remember that the chaotic 
condition of exchange in other countries is infinitely worse 
it is in India. I am not disposed to be unhopeful in this 
matter. 

I have noted carefully every word you said about the 
present condition of affairs caused by the large import trade 
by India and the vast purchases based apparently upon the 
view that the rupee would be kept stabilised at the higher 
rate. I am aware of that position. 

Observations have been made as I have noticed about the 
commercial morality of the merchants. Commercial morality affects credit : credit is a very tender, delicate and sensitive plant and if credit is once affected it takes long to restore it. 
I do not suppose for a moment that there is ground for any 
suggestion of lack of commercial morality. Of course, a 
difficult situation has been created ; I won’t go back to the 
causes. I have observed in some quarters suggestions that 
this Government over which I preside should intervene. 
Without pronouncing any final word, for I have not yet had 
any opportunity of meeting the members of my Council or of 
discussing the situation with Mr. Hailey, the Finance Member, 
I will tell you my own present view. Difficulties have arisen 
between merchants, vendors and purchasers. In the ordinary 
course these are matters that must be solved between them 
and do not seem to require that Government should intervene. 
This is my personal impression at this moment. All I will 
now say is that I trust that means will be found, as they are 
often between persons who are left to regulate their own trade 
position between themselves to alleviate the present strained 
situation, so that it will gradually tend to disappear, and that 
you will be restored to the conditions which existed before 
the present crisis. 

And now let me thank you very much for your welcome. 
May I add that I was very much impressed yesterday arriving 
as a stranger in this beautiful city amongst vast numbers of 
people of whom perhaps I might claim to know at most three 
or four individuals. This welcome was one which went to 
my heart. I do not take it as a personal compliment. I 
believe it was intended as an encouragement to me in coming 
here to meet what is undoubtedly a most difficult situation 
to believe that the people have not set their hearts against 
the new Viceroy but rather that they gladly welcomed a 
Viceroy who wished to be in sympathy with them. It is 
from this that I take some comfort to myself. It leads me to 
study the situation with hopefulness which I trust I shall 
carry to the end of my responsibilities. If only Indians throughout India and the British with myself all work in union, in the closest co-operation for the development of India’s resources for India’s prosperity, there can be no doubt that India will become prosperous and happy. 