
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Curzon
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 30 December 1898
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences: Commander-in-Chief of Bombay, Members of the Governor's Council, Judges of the High Court, and other dignitaries.

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Municipal Corporation of Bombay,— I accept with pleasure the address 
which you have just read out to me, and I have been struck 
by the cordiality and eloquence of the terms in which 
it is expressed. No Viceroy can set foot on these shores, 
which are to be his home, and the scene of his labours, 
for five years, without a keen and almost overpowering 
sense of the importance of the vista that opens before him, 
or without a corresponding gratefulness for the first 
words of welcome that fall from the lips of those over 
whose fortunes he is about to preside. (Cheers.) To me 
it is some slight alleviation of the anxiety in which any 
man must be placed at such a moment, that I do not come 
altogether as a stranger to your country, and that the 
intimate concern which I have long entertained in its 
people and problems, and which will be commensurate 
with my life itself, is based not exclusively upon hearsay, or 
upon reading, but upon some small personal acquaintance 
with India. (Hear, hear.) This is the fifth time that I 
have gazed from the sea upon the majestic panorama of 
your city of palaces and palms ; and if my previous visits 
have been those of a private traveller only, they have yet 
given me an interest, which official experience can but 
enhance, in your city— itself so worthy a gateway to a 
land of enchantment— and in its occupations, so typical 
of the busy industry to which the peoples of India have 
turned under the security assured to them by British 
rule. I am glad to note that in this address you speak 
of the “earnest and devoted loyalty which the whole 
Empire entertains for the Queen-Empress.” My first 
sentiment in accepting this great office when it was 
bestowed upon me, was one of pride that it has fallen to 
my lot to be one of the Governors-General — the fifteenth 
in number, but I would fain hope not the last — in her 
long and illustrious reign. (Cheers.) Such a recollection 
fires a wonderful train of memory, for it brings before one 
a stately procession of names, many of which have passed 
into the Vallhalla of history, and it recalls a period at the 
commencement of which India was but a scattered 
dominion, while at its close it is a relatively homogeneous 
Empire. But it also awakens in the breast of an incoming 
Viceroy an ardent sense of duty, for it inspires him 
with the desire to emulate those distinguished predecessors, 
and to act in a manner not unworthy of that august 
and benignant Sovereign whom he is privileged to 
represent. I believe that loyalty of which you speak 
to the person and the throne of the Queen-Empress 
to be as widespread as it is profound and sincere. 
In my eyes it is more than any other factor the 
bond which holds together in harmonious union the 
diverse races and creeds of this country, and which 
secures to them the blessings of internal peace and 
tranquillity ; and during my stay in India I shall spare 
no effort, so far as in me lies, to fortify, to diffuse, and to 
encourage that feeling. I have seen it somewhere stated 
that I am expected, on this the first occasion that I 
speak on Indian soil, to say something of the principles 
which are likely to be the basis of my administration. I
hold myself dispensed from any such obligation for more 
reasons than one. In the first place, I have, before 
leaving England, given halting expression to the spirit, 
at any rate, in which I approach this undertaking, and 
the fact that you have in your address quoted with 
approval some of the sentiments to which I then gave 
utterance, leads me to think that I need not repeat them 
now. In the second place, it would be presumptuous 
to assume that any one Viceroy enters upon his office 
with a conception of its duties more generous or more 
exacting than his predecessors. (Hear, hear.) Each of 
them, as he has landed on this quay, has doubtless felt 
that he has been summoned to no mean calling, and has 
mentally resolved that justice and magnanimity, that 
sympathy and prudence, shall be the keynotes of his 
administration. I remember that a great countryman of 
mine, on being sent to take up a mission, not indeed 
comparable with this, but one that brought him into 
contact with religions and races different from his own, in 
a remote and difficult country, said that lie went out to hold 
the scales even. Such might be no contemptible motto for 
a Viceroy of India. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) For with 
what a mosaic of nationalities and interests he is confronted ; 
with his own countrymen, few in number, and scattered far 
and wide under a trying climate in a foreign land, and with 
the manifold races and beliefs, so composite and yet so 
divergent, of the indigenous population, in its swarming 
and ever-multiplying millions. To hold the scales even 
under such conditions is a task that calls indeed for supple 
fingers and for nerves of steel. But there is another reflection that leads me to place some restriction upon anything that I may say about the future. No one can be 
more conscious than myself that the verdict to be passed 
upon my administration depends not upon glittering 
promise, or fair prophecy now, but upon actual performance 
later on. (hear, hear, and cheers.) The time for rejoicing 
is not when a man putteth on his armour, but when he 
taketh it off. (Hear, hear.) I thank you for your friendly 
greeting, because no man can be insensible to the encouragement of a generous welcome. But I shall be tenfold better pleased if, when I weigh anchor from those shores, 
and when all eyes are turned towards my successor, any of 
you who are now present can come forward truthfully to 
testify that during my time I have done something, if it 
even be but little, for this land, which, next to my own 
country, is nearest to my heart. 

Gentlemen, in your address you call my attention to 
the fact that, during the past few years, India has been 
subject to the triple scourge of war, pestilence, and famine, 
and that your own Presidency has suffered sorely from the 
ravages of the two latter in particular. In England our 
hearts have gone out to you in your trouble—our purse¬strings have, as you know, been unloosened on your behalf. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) The unceasing and devoted 
efforts of your rulers— of the present illustrious Viceroy, 
and in this place of your Governor, whoso application to 
the onerous work imposed upon him by the plague has 
excited widespread gratitude and admiration (cheers)— have, 
I believe, enabled India to cope with these trials in a 
manner more successful than on any previous occasion. 
(Cheers.) In this great city the patience of your people, 
the voluntary co-operation of your leading citizens, and the 
natural vitality of your resources, have greatly assisted in 
the work of recuperation ; and I would fain believe that 
the corner has now been turned and that an era of reviving 
prosperity is already beginning to dawn. (Cheers.) To 
that movement it will be my agreeable duty to lend whatever impulse I can ; and it is with feelings of sympathy that I regard, and shall take an early opportunity of enquiring into, the great undertaking to which, with so marked a combination of courage and wisdom you are 
about to address yourselves in Bombay. (Hear, hear.) In 
conclusion, it only remains for me to thank you for the 
gracious welcome that you have extended, along with myself, to Lady Curzon. (Cheers.) She comes to this country with predispositions not less favourable, and with sympathies 
not less warm, than mine ; and with me she looks forward 
with earnest delight to a life of labour, but of happy labour, 
in your midst. (Loud cheers.) Allow me, Sir, to thank you 
in conclusion for the address, and for the handsome and 
artistic casket in which it is enclosed. (Loud and prolonged 
cheers.) 

