
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S REPLY TO THE ADDRESS OF WELCOME PRESENTED BY THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE ON SATURDAY, THE 30 OCTOBER 1943
Speaker: Lord Wavell
Audience: New Delhi Municipal Committee
Date: 30 October 1943
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This address is a response
Additional Audiences:

Speech:


Mr. Bryant, Mrs. Sumer ('hand and Gentlemen, — 
Her Excellency and I, though by no moons strangers to 
your city, have been entrusted since we left Delhi with 
new and heavy responsibilities which we find never expected 
would -fall on us, and in these early days we are much 
heartened by your very friendly welcome. It means more 
to us than you may realise that we should be able to go 
forward in the certainty that we have the goodwill and can 
rely on the co-operation of the citizens of the capital city 
of India. 

I can assure you that Her Excellency and I will take 
the keenest interest in New Delhi. We are conscious of 
the very valuable support and encouragement which you 
received from Lord and Lady Linlithgow and of the signal 
service rendered by Lord Linlithgow in initiating and 
executing his anti-malaria scheme. Subject to the limitations imposed by war conditions you will find us no less willing to help, and we are both gratified to find you so anxious 
to improve essential services such as those of education and 
medical relief. 

You speak of the difficulties you have experienced in 
maintaining the distribution systems for electricity and 
water. The Government of India recognise, naturally, the
special importance of the services in New Delhi and 'if the 
need arises will do all that they can to assist von in obtaining supplies of essential materials. 

I can assure you that Her Excellency and I are at one with you in the matter of the removal after the war of temporary buildings. You will recollect that Lord 
Linlithgow gave you an assurance on behalf of the Government of India. 

It is natural that there should be anxiety about the 
requisitioning of houses and one cannot but sympathise 
with those whose personal interests have to be subordinated 
to the necessities of war. The Government of India do 
not propose, unless new unforeseen commitments arise, to 
resort to any further extensive requisitioning in consequence 
of the coming of the South-East Asia Command, though 
they do find it necessary to take up some of the larger 
houses for the accommodation of the more senior officers of 
the Command. 



The great expansion of the population of New Delhi has 
inevitably created difficulties over supply of household 
commodities including fuel and food but the Government 
of India, like your local administration, are alive to the 
dangers and i think you can rest assured that such 
assistance as you need will be forthcoming. 

I am determined to get to know more of Delhi and the 
surrounding country, and my deep anxiety about Bengal, 
which I have just, visited, and about, the other distressed 
areas of India, will not, I hope. I preclude me from interesting myself in move fortunate areas nearer home. On my 
wife you can always rely, as she proved when I was 
Commander-in-chief, to give her time and her active 
support to good causes. We both thank you most warmly 
for your address and look forward to further contacts, and 
to joint endeavours in future. 