
Title: BYCULLA CLUB DINNER, BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Reading
Audience: Members of the Byculla Club
Date: 1 April 1926
Location: Mumbai
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman, Your Excellency, and Gentlemen, — 
I thank you very warmly for the welcome you have given 
me, and you particularly, Mr. Chairman, for all you have 
been good enough to say. Especially do I appreciate your 
references to Her Excellency (applause) ; when I think 
of the anxieties of a few months ago, my mind turns 
immediately with sympathy to Sir Leslie Wilson, with 
earnest hope that his anxieties may be relieved as were 
mine and that Lady Wilson may soon be restored to health 
(applause). 

You have invited me, Mr. Chairman, to disclose to you 
in confidence my views on the past, present and future 
of India. I have attended many farewell banquets and 
have had to make many speeches, but I particularly value 
this opportunity of addressing you tonight with the 
knowledge that there will be no report in cold print for 
me to examine in the morning (applause). I do not know 
whether it has often fallen to the lot of many of you 
here to make a speech and in the morning when the 
newspaper comes, to read it, to realise how much better 
it would have been if you had to make it over again, but 
to know with certainty that even then you would wish 
for another opportunity in order to retrieve the errors 
which assuredly will have been made (laughter). 

Tonight I am about to die as Viceroy, I salute you. 
It is but natural that during many days my thoughts have 
reverted to the early period of my arrival, and when on 
board the ship as we approached Bombay I became more 
and more impressed with the arduousness of the task and 
with the heavy responsibilities I had undertaken. I have 
in mind travelled during the last few days with Lord 
Irwin, and I realise to the full what his thoughts must
have been and are at this moment — the impressions that 
will crowd upon him, the many people, the strange 
vegetation, the hot sun, the colour in the streets and 
generally the totally different atmosphere. I have often 
tried to disentangle the impressions that crowded my brain 
during the early days of my arrival. They remain among the 
lumber of memory where everything is stored and nothing 
is lost ; nevertheless it is extremely difficult and sometimes 
impossible to disengage the impressions from the 
superimposed mass. I have sought to re-call the various 
incidents ; throughout the conviction remained upper- 
most that I had come at a very difficult moment. 
Please remember that in any retrospective path into which 
I may ask you to wander with me, I am not seeking self-glorification. I know too well some of my own imperfections, although I am sure that there are many that escape me. 
In those early days none will deny that times were very 
very troubled. I shall not weary you with a narrative of all 
the events of the 12 or 18 months after my arrival, they were 
days of grave anxiety. You in your daily avocations must 
have been aware how critical were the conditions. 
Whatever the precise and varied causes, it is sufficient to 
remember that a great wave of unrest had swept over the 
world as the result of the War. The din and the clash 
and the bloodiness of battles were still in the minds of 
men. Then came the Peace, almost more difficult than 
the War. There were troubles specially attributable to 
the situation in India ; the shadow of Amritsar was over 
the land and, in addition, the Muhammadan ferment 
caused by the Treaty with Turkey. But this is now 
ancient history and I shall not attempt to analyse more 
thoroughly the causes of the troubles in India. What 
I have already said is in itself sufficient explanation. 
Added to these disturbing factors I had come as Viceroy 
to a country of which I knew little or nothing. It does 
not require much effort of imagination to realise that two 
or three months spent on a sailing vessel waiting for a 
cargo of jute in Calcutta, in the not perhaps very glorious 
role of ship’s boy (cheers) on a cargo ships, did not afford 
many opportunities of meeting the elite either in Calcutta 
or elsewhere in India (applause). By some strange 
oversight the Viceroy of that period forgot to call on me ! 
(laughter). That constituted my personal experience of 
India. I had all to learn when I arrived and now after 
five very crowded years I have acquired a little knowledge, 
but fully recognise that there is much more of India and 
of her people that remains mysterious and unfathomed. 
I will admit to you that during these first periods there 
were moments when I was filled with grave anxiety. 
For many months, I never went to bed at night and never 
rose in the morning without reflecting that there were 320 
million people in India and that of this huge population 
less than two hundred thousand wore Europeans. These 
figures quite baffle human imagination. I do not envy 
the man charged with the burden of Government of India 
if he should have to undergo a similar experience 
(applause). 

That time was anxious for another reason. Many 
who knew India far better than I were in favour of 
immediate definite drastic steps. There was good reason 
for such a course ; nevertheless I thought I saw clearly, 
and unmistakably the need for patience and that by the 
march of time the movement then agitating the country 
was doomed to destruction by its own inherent weakness. 
It was necessary to wait quietly until the right hour 
arrived and then to take action (applause). I admit 
there were moments when doubts crept in, yet the 
inevitability and almost the imminence of the crash seemed 
to me plain. I realised as very rarely in my life what a 
great French philosopher once said that there are certain 
things that stand so clearly marked that no argument is 
required, it is superfluous and in a sense might even tend 
to weaken conviction. I pass over subsequent events. I 
am not attributing all the later developments to my own 
judgment. I realise that good fortune has accompanied 
me in my progress in India. With these observations I 
shall leave the subject asking you to believe that I was 
throughout very conscious of all the difficulties and dangers, 
indeed, no one could occupy my position receiving 
information and advice from many sources, and remain 
ignorant of the gravity of the situation. But all that is 
past ; it is ancient history ; events have moved in our 
favour as they have moved forward. It may be 
confidently asserted that authority has been restored. 
One of the phenomena that met me on arrival and really 
shocked me was the serious weakening of all authority of 
Government. There were many reasons for it. I am not 
speaking in criticism, and least of all of my predecessor, 
for he had indeed many problems and perplexities to solve. 
I merely chronicle the fact that indiscipline and challenge 
and defiance confronted me at every turn. I rejoice that 
at this moment — as you, Sir, have truly said — we can at 
least congratulate ourselves upon the restoration of law 
and order, upon security at home and, I trust, also abroad 
(applause). The basis of all government is security, not 
only against aggression from abroad but also against 
internal commotions and convulsions. Without it there 
is no confidence ; without confidence there is no prosperity ; 
there can be no forward march in business, in the banking 
world, in the shipping world, and generally in all the 
worlds of commerce, and industry and finance, unless 
confidence is established and the people generally realise 
that they need no longer fear the destructive eruption of 
a volcano (applause). 


The Viceroy has many functions to perform. He has 
a dual position. He is both Viceroy and Governor-General. 
As Viceroy, as the direct representative of His Majesty 
he is called upon to exercise the King’s prerogative, to 
stand at the head of affairs, to observe ceremonial and also to 
attend to social duties. As Governor-General he is responsible for the Administration. With the Members of his Council he constitutes the body known as the Governor-General in 
Council, perhaps the most abused body I have ever known 
(laughter). But the duties of both Viceroy and Governor- 
General are discharged by one man, and I cannot tell you 
how often as Viceroy I have longed — speaking in strict 
confidence — to take off my silken gloves and to enter the 
lists to defend my action and that of my Council instead 
of being compelled to sit in a high chair, on a throne, on 
a pinnacle, to receive reports of Proceedings in the 
Legislature and to read that this or that Minister has been 
attacked and had defended himself well and routed his 
assailants (applause). But the Viceroy must remember 
that he should never allow the atmosphere of party political 
conflict to envelop him. I wish sometimes that those who 
criticise and often attack the Viceroy vehemently would 
remember that he cannot make reply to these personal 
observations. 

You may have wondered whether I mean to relate 
matters confidential to you tonight, let me confess that I 
am tempted ; some would argue that temptations of this 
character are brought into existence in order that to a 
certain extent we should succumb to them (applause). 
Nevertheless, I must remember that the confidences are 
those of Government. Yet if I don’t reveal secrets I may 
respond to the invitation that you, Mr. Chairman, have 
set before me. Whilst I am struck by some observations 
you made I shall not travel over them in detail. This is 
not the occasion. I rejoice that yon have realised the 
steady advance in finance, in Railways and generally in 
industry and economies although you at Bombay than not. 
at the present moment be feeling' the full effect (laughter 
and applause). Let me freely acknowledge that I have 
had the good fortune of assistance from the most loyal and 
devoted comrades, who never found work too heavy, who 
never minded at what time of day or night I called for 
information, who laboured persistently and sometimes at 
risk to health, in order to serve the King-Emperor and 
the Empire (applause). 

I might be tempted to speak on foreign affairs which 
are in the charge of the Viceroy, but I shall content myself 
and you with the observation that there is at present no 
dark storm cloud visible. I was quite recently on the 
N.-W. Frontier and was again immensely impressed. The 
men live remarkable lives differing greatly from those 
who inhabit the plains of India. If you have never visited 
the frontier you may not know that almost every house 
stands in its compound with a tower, and you may imagine 
in your innocence that the tower is perhaps some kind of 
minaret for the Muslim call to prayer. But upon inquiry 
you learn that it is the lookout place from which one man 
in his compound watches the other in the next compound 
with whom he has a blood feud and if one rears his head 
above the protection a rifle bullet may go through it immediately. Along the road in the Khyber I saw some 
houses of this character close to the road and noticed a 
kind of tunnel. I sought information and was told that 
it was a tunnel leading to another compound a little further 
off where part of the family live. I asked why a 
tunnel ? " The reply was : " Oh ! because the road is 
sanctuary in this part to within 50 yards either side and as 
the other compound was 55 yards from the road a tunnel 
had to built in order that the members of the family 
could travel underground, I might be tempted to tell you 
more but I am anxious to answer one question that you 
put to me. 

You asked whether I thought this was a country fit 
for Europeans in the future. My answer is yes ! a 
thousand times yes ! and always yes ! (applause). 
Europeans have a duty to perform, they have a responsibility to bear and it will be a lamentable day when the European holds, because of difficulties he may meet, that 
he should go home or that he should not come here 
(applause). Reflect upon all that has been achieved during 
the last 160 or 170 years when conditions were far from 
peaceful when they were much more difficult, and when 
men's lives were daily at stake ; then compare with present situation. Yet our people ventured ; they made the British Empire in India ; they maintained the British 
Empire in India, and Heaven forbid that we of this 
generation should do ought to diminish its power or 
prestige in India and the East (applause). I am not unmindful of the thoughts in your minds. You are thinking probably of racial animosities which may prevail, of a 
future when India will have a larger part in the Government of the country and when, as you may think, although the life of a European may be safe his property may be 
imperilled or the opportunities of earning a living in 
India may be driven away. It is a fair question which 
I never hesitate to answer. I have never doubted that 
there will be room for Europeans here, there may and 
doubtless will be changes although in course of time ; 
indeed, we must remember that in a Proclamation of the 
King-Emperor a solemn assurance was given, that there 
should be, in certain conditions, as time progresses a 
responsible Government in India within the Empire. I 
regard that as solemn and sacred statement, an assurance 
from the King-Emperor which we must support. Whatever the future may show I hope Europeans in this 
country will continue their efforts to establish the Reforms ; they should seek to advance India, to show her the true path, to enable her to understand the practical 
principles of self-government, that she may ultimately 
attain her ambition if only she shows goodwill, that she 
may rejoice wholeheartedly in her partnership in the 
British Empire (applause). I know that the road is difficult. I am conscious of the many mountains to ascend before the summit is reached. We must not travel too fast. 
We cannot give to the East what we have evolved through 
centuries in the West without allowing sufficient time. 
We should do everything possible to improve the conditions of Indians. It may be urged that in the past we have paid too scant attention to the condition of the Indian — 
the poorer Indians generally. I shall not stay to explain 
the difficulties administrators have met in the past ; conditions were very different and yet much was accomplished. But conceptions of empire have largely advanced. We 
should go forward striving to advance the interests of 
India as a component part of the empire, to ameliorate the 
lot of the poor and of him who should never be forgotten, 
the poorest among the poor. Government have recently 
ordered an enquiry which may, and I earnestly hope will, 
improve the conditions of some 85 per cent, of the people. 
A Royal Commission has been appointed, and I rejoice 
that His Excellency Lord Irwin who will be responsible 
for action upon the Report was the representative of 
Agriculture in the Cabinet until his appointment as 
Viceroy. Various other roads of progress will suggest themselves to the mind, but I cannot discuss them tonight. Among the obligations devolving upon Government 
is primarily that of preserving order. Before we hand 
over this highly important duty to the local legislatures 
we must be reasonably certain that it will be in safe keeping and will not become the sport of political parties. If India refuses, if India declines to accept the constitution 
we have presented to her, the responsibility will not be 
ours. It will be lamentable, because we shall have failed 
in the task we had set ourselves, that is, to guide Indians 
to democratic constitutional Government as we understand in the West. It has already been made plain that 
we are not wedded to words or to forms ; you will remember that Lord Birkenhead in his speech invited Indians to put forward an alternative constitution devised on India 
lines if they wished it. My observation of Indian politics 
during these five years leads to the conclusion that the 
differences between us and Indian leaders are mainly that 
they want full powers immediatialy whereas we think more 
time is needed (applause). 

Gentlemen, when I think of approaching departure 
my heart is full of gratitude for the opportunities vouchsafed to me of contributing to the wonderful work of the British in India (applause). I rejoice that it fell 
to my lot to come here, and although I recognise very 
fully that in time to come, if not now, my actions may be 
criticised, perhaps many errors may be discovered, yet I 
trust it will be acknowledged that I strove to the utmost 
of my ability to discharge the responsibilities of my high 
office. As we approached Bombay on first arrival the 
political sky seemed heavy and overcast and stormy. I gazed 
at it and pondered how shall I discover the light, and then I 
discerned a ray of sunshine which came through the 
clouds to me, illumining the whole political firmament. It 
burnt into my mind in letters of gold: — " go forward, 
fearlessly, faithfully and honestly according to the best 
of your ability and to the true dictates of your conscience." 
I have tried never to forget the precept of that ray 
(applause). 

I cannot leave you tonight without giving expression 
to a thought that accompanies me whenever I reflect upon 
my departure. You have guessed it before I give it utterance. Throughout I have had the invaluable solace and cohort of my wife (applause), in the truest sense of the 
word the best comrade a man could ever find (applause).
She and I will leave a large part of our hearts still in 
India. We have become deeply attached to her, and when 
we are home we shall recollect the days when we were 
in India together, we shall recall the trials and vicissitudes 
but we shall dwell upon the more pleasurable aspects and 
these many. I shall again reflect upon my good fortune 
in having had most loyal and devoted comrades throughout
the whole of my Viceroyalty. In the end as I leave India, 
as I wend my way home, I return with a deeper realisation of the beneficent outlook of the British Empire, with, a wider understanding of its duties and responsibilities, 
with a larger conception of the influence and power of that 
great commonwealth of nations. I glory in the high purpose it is our duty as citizens of the Empire to seek to achieve ; in the moral standpoint of public, service we strive 
to inculcate, in the endeavour to improve the conditions of 
the poorer and less fortunate people, in the earnest wish 
that this country may be the better for our efforts, that 
we may have contributed to the cause of humanity, and 
that we may have assisted in promoting the welfare and 
happiness of India. (Prolonged applause). 