
Title: SPEECH AT THE BYCULLA CLUB BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Dufferin
Audience: Members of the Byculla Club 
Date: 13 December 1888
Location: Mumbai
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Your Excellency, Your Royal Highness, Mr. President and Gentlemen,— I am very sensible of the honour 
you have conferred upon me by inviting me to this banquet, 
and I am still more grateful for the kind manner in which 
you have received the mention of my name, which has been 
brought to your notice in such eloquent and flattering 
terms by your Chairman, Judge Bayley. (Cheers.) But, alas, 
when I shall have adequately thanked you for your hospitality, 
I feel that I have come to the end of my tether. I have 
made so many speeches lately that I stand before you in 
the position of a soldier called upon to fire a salute, but 
who has already expended all his gunpowder. (Laughter 
and cheers.) I have not even so much as a cartridge left 
in my pouch. (Laughter.) Nay, I am no longer even a 
commissioned officer, and am liable to be strung up as a 
franc tireur if I begin discharging rhetorical fireworks 
in your midst. (Laughter.) Even were it otherwise, your 
younger sister— for it is in that light I understand that 
Calcutta is very properly considered on this side of India — 
has cheated you of your birth-right. (Laughter.) Following a very ancient example, she came and beguiled me with a savoury dish in the form of a haggis (laughter), and has 
stolen your blessing— that is to say, if you consider a political speech of an hour and a half a blessing after dinner, which it certainly is not to the person who has to deliver it. 
(Laughter). For all that, I am glad of this opportunity of 
correcting a palpable mis-statement which crept inadvertently into my St. Andrew's deliverance, and which is now misleading the public of India. It was a gross error of figures ; 
but however humiliating, as an honest man I am bound to 
correct it. I then stated that, in the East, two and two have a tendency to make five. I have now had time to square my private accounts, and I find that, as far as the 
rupee is concerned, so far from two and two making five, 
the very reverse is the case, and that they only make three. 
(Loud laughter.) But though, gentlemen, I am precluded, 
as I have said, owing to want of ammunition, and for other 
reasons, from inflicting on you a political discourse, I must 
at least try to make you understand how glad I am to find 
myself again beneath your hospitable roof. Probably, of 
all the variegated scenes that pass in succession before the 
eyes of an Indian Viceroy during the four or five years that 
he remains in this country, — full of colour and picturesque 
splendour as they all are, — the one which is the most 
ineffaceable, which makes the deepest impression upon 
both his physical and mental vision, is that which presents 
itself to his gaze when he first sights your historic shores. 
(Cheers.) Having traversed many thousand miles of 
barren ocean, he suddenly finds himself secure within the 
arms of one of the most magnificent harbours of the East. 
Standing on the threshold of his new life, about to assume 
a weight of cares and responsibilities such as is imposed on 
the shoulders of no other public man in the world, he looks 
abroad with a feeling of awe upon the new' realms he is 
called on to govern. A display of military pomp, greater 
even than that which surrounds the monarchs of Europe, 
accentuates the solemnity of his landing, and when he 
passes through the thoroughfares of your city ennobled by 
buildings which any Western capital might envy (cheers), 
he sees on every side, crowding every window and balcony, 
and thronging every street, lane, and alley, such innumerable multitudes of men and women gazing at him with earnest and expectant eyes, that he shrinks appalled at the 
thought that it is for the safety and welfare of these 
thousands, and for other thousands, nay, millions, similar 
to these— yes, almost for their daily food,— that he, with 
his limited experience and finite capacities, has become answerable to his Sovereign and to the people of England. (Applause.) The thoughts which pass through his mind, 
gentlemen, on that occasion are never forgotten, and would 
be sufficient almost to overwhelm him were it not that the 
kindly greetings, the loyal addresses, the encouraging 
promises of support and of indulgent recognition which at 
once begin to pour in upon him from your Rulers, your 
Citizens, and your Corporate and other associated Bodies, 
re-invigorate his spirits, and give him the assurance that, 
after all, his lines are cast in pleasant places, and that his 
future work will lie in the midst of a kindly and sympathetic 
community, while it is shared and lightened by a Public Civil 
Service that has neither its like nor its equal in the world, 
(Loud cheers.) But, perhaps, only second to these profound 
impressions are those which he experiences at the end of his 
term, when he finds himself again amongst you on the eve 
of bidding good-bye to those who so warmly welcomed 
him on his first arrival. (Applause) Between the two 
events, though comprising after all but a short period of 
time, if merely counted by years, there stretches what in 
its retrospect almost seems a lifetime — so full has it been 
of varied experiences of continuous anxiety and of unremitting effort. The vague and only half surmised troubles and difficulties which rose to his imagination then have 
since translated themselves into harassing realities. The 
labour, the worry, the need for constant vigilance, which 
he anticipated would be great, he has found infinitely more 
constant and imperative than anything known to his previous experience, while, in addition to the cares inseparable from the ordinary work of administration, many an unexpected crisis, thunderbolts out of a clear sky, occasioned by circumstances which could not have been foreseen or 
controlled, have been superadded to task his patience, his 
endurance, his courage, and his skill to the utmost. (Loud 
applause.) Well, then, gentlemen, happy is the man who, 
however conscious he may be that he has fallen short of his own ideal ; that he has failed in some measure to accomplish all the good he might have desired, or completely to remedy 
the evils with which circumstances called upon him to contend -happy is the man, I say, who, coming back to you at the end of his term, receives at the hands of those who 
originally welcomed him such hearty greetings as you and 
my other friends in this part of the world, both English 
and Native, have been pleased to accord to me. (Loud 
cheers.) And still happier is he if his conscience does not 
forbid him to hope that your favourable verdict will perhaps receive the imprimatur of history; for it is the future alone that can disclose the effect of a Ruler's actions, or 
gauge the breadth and depth of the foundations he may 
have laid for further improvement. (Applause). As regards the present, I think it may be fairly said that I have handed over India to my successor without a cloud on the 
horizon, — for we may consider the Thibetan difficulty as 
settled, the Chinese Amban having arrived at Rinchingong 
to-day (applause) — with her princes and people contented 
—with her finances — in spite of Burma, Sikkim, and the 
Black Mountain — in a state of equilibrium — unless, indeed 
the coming harvest should prove exceptionally short — and 
with no internal questions on hand which cannot readily be 
solved by that patience, firmness, and sympathetic sagacity which no one possesses in a greater measure than the present Viceroy. (Cheers.) I hope I have also done 
something towards enabling India to read her own thoughts, 
to discriminate between vain dreams and possible realities, 
and to comprehend that which she really wants as distinguished from that which she neither needs nor wants, and which cannot be given to her. (Applause.) Nor, gentlemen, have I been unmindful of your own immediate interests. The fortifications of your city have been set on foot 
(thanks to the energy of Lord Reay, who never ceases to 
trouble the tranquillity of our Simla Olympus whenever 
your interests are at stake) (applause) with as much expedition as the extraordinary faculty which able engineers possess of differing from one another will allow. (Laughter.) 
The works have already made considerable progress, and 
when the whole scheme has been developed and properly 
supplemented by torpedo fields, by suitably armed warships, and by a body of marine fencibles, you will be able to sleep in your beds in greater peace than the inhabitants 
of half a hundred towns in the mother country. (Loud 
applause.) Nor have I failed to recognise the importance 
of adequate railway communication between the Western 
Gate of India and its sister capital of Bengal, to the mutual advantage of both cities and of either province. (Applause.) Under these circumstances, gentlemen, I 
trust I am not called upon, like Caesar, to put aside the 
parting wreath of approval which you have so generously 
offered to me. (Loud cheers.) Gentlemen, all Governors 
and Viceroys arrive on your shores with their heads jubilant and erect upon their shoulders ; but, alas ! it is always a question whether they may not return in the guise of 
St. Denis, decapitated by public opinion either here or at 
home. Well, gentlemen, you have been pleased to declare 
that my head remains as safely set in its place as when 
I first saw you. (Applause.) If it has been turned in the 
meantime, it has been turned by the universal kindness 
and good-will which I have received in all parts of India, 
and at the hands of every section of its inhabitants. Had 
it been turned by the ladies, that is an accident to which 
all Irishmen are subject. (Laughter.) Turned it certainly will be when I leave your shores — turned towards you with grateful thanks, with many a fond regret, and, as long 
as' I live, with a still constant regard to your interests and 
welfare. (Renewed cheering.) 

