
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE MUSLIM COMMITTEE OF BOMBAY 
Speaker: Lord Irwin
Audience: Muslim Committee of Bombay
Date: 16 April 1931
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen, — It is most kind of you 
to have gathered here this morning, and to join in the 
series of farewells which the people of Bombay have been 
good enough to arrange for Lady Irwin and myself. I
greatly value the opportunity, not so much of elaborating 
my views on any of the momentous questions now at issue — 
for time is already short enough for my many engagements — as of saying good-bye, through the representative body here present, to the great Muslim community, whose 
interests are and always will be to me a matter of deep 
concern. You would not, I think, wish me to go deeply 
into the intricacies of such matters as electorates, weightage 
in favour of minority communities, and other particular 
safeguards which may be necessary for the fair adjustment of conflicting claims. Most of those matters have, as you say, been dealt with in our Despatch upon this 
subject, and more lately by the Round Table Conference, 
which is now having a breathing space after its strenuous 
labours, but will, I hope, resume before long its important 
deliberations. On some of these questions general agreement was reached at the Conference ; on others I believe the overwhelming majority of Muslims throughout India 
feel even more strongly today than ever before. Many 
persons think quite honestly that they are mistaken in their 
views, and in the tenacity with which they hold them. 
But that is not the real point at issue. Indian opinion of 
all sorts is now striving to lay the political foundations 
of a homogeneous nation. And, if there is one thing more 
certain than another, it is that no political society can 
prosper or be at peace within itself, unless minorities 
included in it are reasonably satisfied with their conditions. 
Therefore it is no answer to say that particular provisions 
that minorities deem essential for their interests are 
inimical to the evolution of Indian nationhood, for this 
ultimately depends upon a consideration far more fundamental, namely, the contentment of those who form a vital part of the whole society. And that is the end that must 
constantly be kept in view. Therefore, if, as I believe to 
be the case, there is a wide feeling of apprehension among 
minorities, and if I may offer a word of personal advice, 
I would say that the only wise course for the majority 
community is frankly to recognise these apprehensions, 
unfounded though they may adjudge them to be, and be 
prepared to give them the reassurance that they desire 
and claim until such time as, of their own free choice, the 
minorities are with substantial unanimity prepared to let 
it go. 

No one can exaggerate the harm brought by these 
recent savage outbursts in Cawmpore and other places in 
the United Provinces, and it is inevitable that they should 
have greatly hardened Muslim opinion, so that in present 
circumstances the hope of settlement seems remote. If 
however the majority community, acting with sound political judgment, could see their way to give the message I have suggested to their Moslem fellow-countrymen, I 
believe its immediate effect would be to work such a 
change in Moslem feeling as would alter the whole atmosphere for the better, and make the whole problem very much less intractable than it unhappily is today. 

You were good enough just now to express the hope 
that the experience I have been able to acquire during 
my five years as Viceroy would not be entirely lost to 
India. I can assure you that I look upon that experience 
as far too precious and privileged a possession to be 
lightly laid aside, and it will always be my endeavour to 
interpret to English opinion what I believe to be the 
ideals and aspirations of the Indian people. The thought 
that in years to come there will still be that work to do, 
and the knowledge that that work will help to keep me 
in touch, personally or by correspondence, with many of 
the friends I have made in India, go far to reconcile me 
to the parting which I shall have to take two days hence. 

In taking this farewell of yon, and in thanking yon, 
on Lady Irwin’s behalf and on my own, for the kind 
things yon have said this morning, I need not assure you 
that any influence or knowledge that may be mine will 
continue to be at the service of India, and that no warmer 
wishes than my own will always accompany those who 
are loyally striving for her greater good. 