
Title: FAREWELL DINNER AT THE BYCULLA CLUB, BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Curzon
Audience: Members of the Byculla Club
Date: 16 November 1905
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Three times have the Byculla Club honoured me with an 
invitation to dinner. The first occasion was when I was 
leaving India at the end of my first term of office in April 
1904. The second was when I returned to India for my 
second term in December 1905 ; and this is the third, when 
I am finally departing. I have esteemed this triple compliment most highly. For ordinarily Bombay does not see or know much of the Viceroy except what it reads in the 
newspapers— which is not perhaps uniformly favourable ; 
and, with a Governor of your own, you cannot be expected 
to take as much interest in the head of the Supreme Government as other communities or places with which he is brought into more frequent contact. In respect of Bombay, 
however, I have been unusually fortunate in my time ; for 
apart from the four occasions of arrival or departure, I have 
been here once in Lord Sandhurst’s, and once in Lord 
Northcote’s time, and again a week ago, so that this is my 
seventh visit in seven years. Here I made my first speech on 
Indian shores, and here it is not unfitting that I should make 
my last. Calcutta did me the honour of inviting me to a 
parting banquet, and so did the Civil Service of Bengal ; and 
I was greatly touched by those compliments. But I felt 
that, having accepted your invitation, I owed a duty to you, 
and that I should only become a nuisance if I allowed 
myself either the luxury or the regret of too many farewells. 

Gentlemen, it is no exaggeration to say that my several 
visits to this city have given me an unusual interest in its 
fortunes. I have seen it in prosperity and I have seen it in 
suffering ; and I have always been greatly struck by the 
spirit and patriotism of its citizens. There seems to me to 
be here an excellent feeling between the very different races 
and creeds. Bombay possesses an exceptional number of 
public-spirited citizens, and the sense of civic duty is as 
highly developed as in any great city that I know. If there 
is a big movement afoot, you bend yourselves to it with a 
powerful and concentrated will, and a united Bombay is not 
a force to be gainsaid. Let me give as an illustration the 
magnificent success of your reception and entertainment of 
Their Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales. 
Moreover, you have the advantage of one of the best conducted and ablest newspapers in Asia. My recollections of Bombay are also those of uniform kindness towards myself, 
a kindness which has found active expression on each 
occasion that I have visited the city, and that has culminated 
to-night in this splendid entertainment and in the reception 
that you have just accorded to my health. 

As to the speech of the Chairman, to which we listened 
just now, I hardly feel that I know what I ought to say. 
He seemed to me to be so familiar with all the details of my 
administration that I felt that, if I ever wanted a biographer, 
it is to Bombay and to the Byculla Club that I must come 
to find him. But his account of what I have done — or perhaps 
I should rather say endeavoured to do — was characterised by 
so generous an insistence on the best that I almost felt that 
a rival orator should be engaged to get up and paint the 
opposite side of the picture. I know of several who would 
have been prepared without a gratuity to undertake the 
congenial task — only in that case I should not perhaps have 
enjoyed the hospitality of this harmonious gathering. I 
must therefore leave things as they are, and content myself 
with thanking the Chairman for his great and undeserved 
leniency in his treatment of the subject of his toast. Gentlemen, I have thus endeavoured to express my acknowledgments of your kindness, and I must include in these acknowledgments those of Lady Curzon. Your gracious reference to her presence greatly touched my heart. 

May I also take this opportunity through you of thank- 
ing all those communities and persons who, from all parts 
of India, have, during the past three months, showered 
upon me expressions of esteem and regret. I think I am 
justified in assuming, both from the quarters from which 
they have emanated and also from the language employed, 
that these have not been merely conventional expressions. 
From a departing Viceroy no one in India has anything 
more to ask or to expect ; his sun is setting and another 
orb is rising above the horizon. If in these circumstances 
he receives, unexpected and unsought, from representative 
bodies and associations, from the leaders of races and 
communities, from princes, and from unknown humble 
men, such messages, couched in such unaffected language 
as have crowded in upon me, while he cannot but feel 
very grateful for all this kindness, there may also steal 
into his mind the comforting reflection that he has not 
altogether laboured in vain, but has perhaps left some footprints that will not be washed out by the incoming tide. 

Gentlemen, it is almost seven years ago that I stood 
upon the neighbouring quay on the morning that I landed 
to take up my new office. Well do I remember the occasion and the scene ; the Bunder gay with bunting and 
brilliant with colour ; the background of the acclaiming 
streets with their tens of thousands, and the setting of the 
stateliest panorama in Asia. I do not deny that to me it 
was a very solemn moment. For I was coming here to 
take up the dream of my life and to translate into fact my 
highest aspirations. In that spirit I endeavoured to respond 
to the address of the Corporation, and were I landing again 
to-morrow, I would use the same language again. Oceans 
seem now to roll between that day and this ; oceans of 
incident and experience, of zest and achievement, of anxiety 
and suffering, of pleasure and pain. But as I stood there 
that morning and the vista spread out before me, I said 
that I came to India to hold the scales even : and as I stand 
here to-night seven years later, I dare to say in all humility 
that I have done it — have held the scales even between all 
classes and all creeds— sometimes to my detriment, often 
at a cost that none but myself can tell, but with such truth 
and fidelity as in me lay. I further said that the time for 
judgment was not when a man puts on his armour but when 
he takes it off. Even now I am fast unbuckling mine ; in a 
few hours the last piece will have been laid aside. But, 
Gentlemen, the test — can I survive my own test? The 
answer to that I must leave to you among many others, and 
by your verdict I am willing to abide. 

Gentlemen, when I came here seven years ago I had 
some idea, but not perhaps a very complete idea, of what 
the post of Viceroy of India is. Now that I am in a position to give a more matured opinion on the subject, I may proceed to throw a little light upon it. There are, I 
believe, many people at home who cherish the idea that the 
Viceroy in India is the representative of the Sovereign in 
much the same way as Viceroys or Governors-General in 
other parts of the British Empire, except that, India being 
in the East, it is considered wise to surround him with 
peculiar state and ceremonial, while in a country which is 
not a constitutional colony but a dependency, it is of course 
necessary to invest him with certain administrative powers. 
No conception of the Viceroy’s position and duties could 
well be wider of the mark. Certainly the proudest and most 
honourable of his functions is to act as representative of the 
Sovereign, and this act is invested with unusual solemnity 
and importance in a society organised like that of India 
upon the aristocratic basis, where the Throne is enveloped 
in an awe that is the offspring of centuries, and is 
supported by princely dynasties in many cases as old as 
itself. The consciousness of this responsibility should, 
I think, always operate both as a stimulus and as a check to 
the Viceroy— a stimulus to him to act in a manner worthy 
of the exalted station in which for a short time he is placed, 
and a check to keep him from inconsiderate or unworthy 
deeds. But that is of course only the beginning of the 
matter. The Viceroy very soon finds out that the purely Viceregal aspect of his duties is the very least portion of them, and the Court-life, in which he is commonly depicted 
by ignorant people as revelling, occupies only the place 
of a compulsory background in his every-day existence. He 
soon discovers that he is the responsible head of what is by 
far the most perfected and considerable of highly organised 
Governments in the world ; for the Government of China, 
which is supposed to rule over a larger number of human 
beings, can certainly not be accused of a high level of either 
organisation or perfection. So much is the Viceroy the 
head of that Government that almost every act of his 
subordinates is attributed to him by public opinion ; and if 
he is of an active and enterprising nature, a sparrow can 
scarcely twitter its tail at Peshawar without a response 
being detected to masterful orders from Simla or Calcutta. 
This aspect of the Viceroy’s position makes him the target 
of public criticism to a degree in excess, I think, of that 
known in any foreign country, except perhaps America. I 
think that in India this is sometimes carried too far. 
When the Viceroy speaks, he is supposed to remember 
only that he is the representative of the Sovereign. But 
when he is spoken or written about, it is commonly only as 
head of the administration ; and then nothing is sometimes 
too bad for him. I only make these remarks because this 
seems to me rather a one-sided arrangement, and because 
I think anything is to be deprecated that might deter your 
Viceroys from taking the supreme and active part in 
administration which it seems to me to be their duty to do. 
You do not want them to be faineants or figureheads. 
You want them to pull the stroke oar in the boat. You 
want English Ministries to send you their very best men, 
and then you want to get out of them, not the correct performance of ceremonial duties, but the very best work of which their energies or experiences or abilities may render 
them capable. Anything therefore that may deter them 
from such a conception of their duties or confine them to the sterile pursuit of routine is, in my view, greatly to be deplored. 

However, I am only yet at the beginning of my enumeration of the Viceroy’s tale of bricks. He is the head, not merely of the whole Government, but also of the most 
arduous Department of Government, viz., the Foreign Office. 
There he is in the exact position of an ordinary Member of 
Council, with the difference that the work of the Foreign 
Department is unusually responsible, and that it embraces 
three spheres of action so entirely different and requiring 
such an opposite equipment of principles and knowledge 
as the conduct of relations with the whole of the Native 
States of India, the management of the frontier provinces 
and handling of the frontier tribes, and the offering of advice 
to His Majesty’s Government on practically the entire 
foreign policy of Asia, which mainly or wholly concerns 
Great Britain in its relation to India. But the Viceroy, 
though he is directly responsible for this one Department, 
is scarcely less responsible for the remainder. He exercises 
over them a control which is, in my judgment, the secret 
of efficient administration. It is the counterpart of what 
used to exist in England, but has died out since the days of 
Sir Robert Peel— with consequences which cannot be too 
greatly deplored. I earnestly hope that the Viceroy in 
India may never cease to be head of the Government in the 
fullest sense of the term. It is not one man rule, which may 
or may not be a good thing— that depends on the man. 
But it is one man supervision, which is the very best form 
of Government, presuming the man to be competent. The 
alternative in India is a bureaucracy, which is the most 
mechanical and lifeless of all forms of administration. 

To continue, the Viceroy is also the President of the 
Legislative Council, where he has to defend the policy of 
Government in speeches which are apt to be denounced as 
empty if they indulge in platitudes, and as undignified if they 
do not. He must have a financial policy, an agricultural 
policy, a famine policy, a plague policy, a railway policy, 
an educational policy, an industrial policy, a military policy. 
Everybody in the country who has a fad or a grievance — 
and how many are there without either — hunts him 
out. Every public servant who wants an increase of pay, 
allowances, or pension— a not inconsiderable band —appeals 
to him as the eye of justice; everyone who thinks he 
deserves recognition, appeals to him as the fountain of 
honour. When he goes on tour he has to try to know 
nearly as much about local needs as the people who have 
lived there all their lives, and he has to refuse vain requests 
in a manner to make the people who asked them feel 
happier than they were before. When he meets the merchants he must know all about tea, sugar, indigo, jute, cotton, salt and oil. He is not thought much of unless he 
can throw in some knowledge of shipping and customs. 
In some places electricity, steel and iron, and coal are 
required. For telegraphs he is supposed to have a special 
partiality ; and he is liable to be attacked about the metric 
system. He must be equally prepared to discourse about 
labour in South Africa or labour in Assam. The connecting 
link between him and Municipalities is supplied by water 
and drains. He must be prepared to speak about everything and often about nothing. He is expected to preserve temples, to keep the currency steady, to satisfy 3rd class 
passengers, to patronise race meetings, to make Bombay 
and Calcutta each think that it is the capital city of India, 
and to purify the Police. He corresponds with all his Lieutenants in every province, and it is his duty to keep in touch with every Local Administration. If he does not reform 
everything that is wrong, he is told that he is doing too little, if he reforms anything at all that he is doing too much. 

I am sure that I could occupy quite another five minutes 
of your time in depicting the duties which you require of 
the Viceroy in India, and to which I might have added the agreeable finale of being entertained at complimentary banquets. But I have said enough perhaps to show that it 
is no light burden that I am now laying down, and that it is 
not perhaps surprising if seven years of it should prove 
enough for any average constitution. And yet I desire to 
say on this parting occasion that I regard the office of 
Viceroy of India, inconceivably laborious as it is, as the 
noblest office in the gift of the British Crown. I think the 
man who does not thrill upon receiving it with a sense not 
of foolish pride but of grave responsibility, is not fit to be 
an Englishman. I believe that the man who holds it with 
devotion, and knows how to wield the power wisely and 
well, as so many great men in India have done, can for a 
few years exercise a greater influence upon the destinies of 
a larger number of his fellow creatures than any head of an 
administration in the universe. I hold that England ought 
to send out to India to fill this great post the pick of her 
statesmen, and that it should be regarded as one of the 
supreme prizes of an Englishman's career. I deprecate any 
attempt, should it ever be made, to attenuate its influence, 
to diminish its privileges, or to lower its prestige. Should 
the day ever come when the Viceroy of India is treated as 
the mere puppet or mouthpiece of the Home Government, 
who is required only to carry out whatever orders it may be 
thought desirable to transmit, I think that the justification 
for the post would have ceased to exist. But I cannot 
believe that the administrative wisdom of my countrymen, 
which is very great, would ever tolerate so great a blunder. 

And now, Gentlemen, after this little sketch of the duties 
of a Viceroy, you may expect to hear something of the 
manner of fulfilling them. I have been told that on the 
present occasion I am expected to give a sort of synopsis 
of the last seven years of administration. I am sure you will 
be intensely relieved to learn that I intend to disappoint 
those expectations. Lists of laws, or administrative acts, or 
executive policies, may properly figure in a budget speech,
they may be recorded in an official Minute ; they may be 
grouped and weighed by the historian. But they are hardly 
the material for an after-dinner oration. Besides which I 
have been spared the necessity of any such review by the 
generous ability with which it has already been performed 
for me by the Press. 

Inasmuch, however, as all policy that is deserving of the 
name must rest upon certain principles, perhaps you will 
permit me to point out what are the main principles that 
have underlain everything to which I have set my hand in 
India. They are four in number. The first may sound 
very elementary, but it is in reality cardinal. It is the 
recognition that for every department of the State, and for 
every branch of the administration, there must be a policy 
instead of no policy, i.e., a method of treating the subject 
in question which is based upon accepted premises, either of 
reasoning or experience, and is laid down in clear language, 
understood by the officers who have to apply it, and 
intelligible to the people to whom it is to be applied. It is 
in fact the negation of a policy of drift. 

Years ago I remember coming to India and commencing 
my studies of the Frontier Question. I enquired of everyone 
I met what was the Frontier Policy of the Government 
of India. I even mounted as high as Members of Council. 
No one could tell me. I found one view at Calcutta, another 
at Lahore, another at Peshawar, and another at Quetta, and 
scores of intervening shades between. That is only an 
illustration ; but that absence of a policy cost India 
thousands of lives and crores of rupees. Of course in our 
attempt to fashion or to formulate policies my colleagues 
and I may not always have been successful — our policy need 
not have been uniformly right. We make no such claim. 
All that we say is that the policy is now there, not hidden 
away or enshrouded in hieroglyphics, but emphatically laid 
down, in most cases already given to the world, and in 
every case available for immediate use. There is not a 
single branch of the administration, internal or external, of 
which I believe that this cannot truthfully be said. I will give 
you a few illustrations drawn from spheres as widely 
separated as possible. 

Take Foreign Affairs. The Government of India can 
hardly be described as having a Foreign Policy of their 
own, because our foreign relations must necessarily be coordinated with those of the Empire. But we can have our views and can state them for what they are worth ; and 
there are certain countries in the close neighbourhood of 
our frontiers where the conduct of affairs is necessarily in 
our hands. Thus, in respect of Tibet, the Government of 
India have throughout had a most definite policy which has 
not perhaps been fully understood, because it has never 
been fully stated in published correspondence, but which I 
have not the slightest doubt will vindicate itself, and that 
before long. Similarly, with regard to Afghanistan, our 
policy throughout my term of office has been directed to 
clearing up all the doubts or misunderstandings that had 
arisen out of our different agreements with the late Amir, 
and to a renewal of those agreements, freed from such 
ambiguity, with his successor. It was to clear up these 
doubts that the Mission was sent to Kabul, as the Amir 
found himself unable to carry out his first intention to come 
down to India ; and for all the widespread tales that the 
Mission had been sent to press roads or railroads or 
telegraphs and all sorts of unacceptable conditions upon the 
Amir, from which the Government of India or myself was 
alleged to have been only with difficulty restrained by a 
cautious Home Government, there was never one shred of 
foundation. 

Perhaps in Persia, a subject which is perhaps better 
appreciated, and is certainly better written about in Bombay 
than in any other city of the Empire, we have been able to 
do most in respect of a positive and intelligible policy. Resting upon Lord Lansdowne’s statesmanlike and invaluable dictum as to the Persian Gulf, from which I trust that 
no British Government will ever be so foolish as to recede, 
we have been able to pursue a definite course of action in 
defence of British interests at Muscat, Bahrein, Koweit, and 
throughout the Persian Gulf. The same applies to Mekran 
and Seistan, and I believe that I leave British interests in 
those quarters better safeguarded than they have ever before 
been. I will not trouble you further about foreign affairs 
to-night, though I might take you round the confines of the 
Indian Empire and show you an Aden Boundary determined, 
largely owing to the ability of the officers serving under 
my noble friend, our relations with Sikkim and Bhutan 
greatly strengthened, and the final settlement of the Chino-Burmese Boundary practically achieved. 

Neither will I detain you about the tribal frontier of 
India, although the fact that I can dismiss this almost in a 
sentence is perhaps more eloquent than any speech could 
be. The point is that the Government of India, the local 
officers, and the tribesmen now know exactly what we are
aiming at, namely, in so far as we are obliged to maintain 
order, to keep up communications, or to exert influence in 
the tribal area, to do it, not with British troops, but through 
the tribes themselves. The other day I saw the Chief 
Commissioner of the North-West Frontier Province, and 
asked him if he could sum up the position of the Frontier. 

‘ Yes,’ he replied, ‘I can, in a single word, and that is 
"Confidence.” ' Confidence at Hunza, confidence at Chitral, 
which when I came out to India I was told by the pundits 
at home that I should have to evacuate in a year, but which 
is now as tranquil as the compound of the Byculla Club, 
confidence in the Khyber and the Kurram, confidence all 
down the frontier of Baluchistan. Gentlemen, that is no 
mean boast. I observe that all the people who have for 
years depicted me as a somewhat dangerous person, and 
who were kind enough to warn India 7 years ago of the 
terrible frontier convulsions that she was in for under my 
rule, have found it a little difficult to account for the 7 years' 
peace that has settled down on the land. Two explanations 
have, however, lately been forthcoming. The first is that 
the tribes were so severely handled by my predecessor that 
they have not had a kick in them left for me. The second 
is that having concentrated all my unholy propensities in the 
direction of Tibet, where, however, for some unexplained 
reason I did not begin until I had been in India for four years, 

I had nothing left for the tribes. I do not think that I need 
be disturbed by either of these criticisms. I can hand over 
the frontier to my successor, with the happy assurance not 
only that matters arc quiet, but that the principles determining our action, whether as regards tribal militia, or border military police, or frontier roads and railways, or 
tribal control, are all clearly laid down, and are understood. 
If these principles are departed from, if the Government of 
India were to go in for a policy of cupidity or adventure, 
then the confidence of which I have spoken would not last 
a month. Otherwise I do not see why it should not be 
enduring. 

We have also for seven years pursued a very consistent 
military policy, not differing therein in the least from the 
distinguished men who preceded us, but using the much 
larger opportunities that have been presented to us by 
recurring surpluses to carry out measures of which they 
often dreamed, but which they had not the funds to realise. 
I am not one of those who think that the Indian Army is a 
bad one, I believe it to be by far the best portion of the 
forces of the British Crown : and certainly such work as it has 
been my duty to ask it to undertake, whether in South 
Africa or China or Somaliland or Tibet, has been as good 
as any in the history of the Empire. We have done a good 
deal to render the Indian Army, I will not say more efficient, 
but more effective. We have entirely re-armed every 
section of it. We have reorganised the horse and field 
artillery from top to bottom. We have created a new 
transport organisation ; we are now making our own gunpowder, rifles, gun-carriages and guns ; we have added 500 British officers and are proposing to add 350 more, we are 
doubling the Native Army reserves ; and all these measures 
are independent of the schemes of reorganisation and 
redistribution of which you have heard so much. If due 
attention continues to be paid to the idiosyncrasies of the 
Native Army, and if it is treated sympathetically, I believe 
that we shall continue to receive from it the splendid level of 
service which is its tradition and its glory. 

In the sphere of internal politics we have adopted a 
slightly different method, though with the same end, for 
there we have as a rule not framed our policy without a 
most exhaustive preliminary examination of the data upon 
which it ought to rest, conducted by the most expert 
authorities whose services we could command. Thus we 
did not proceed to draw up a Plague Policy until the Plague 
Commission had reported. Our new Famine Codes and 
Manuals, the methods by which the Government of India 
will grapple with the next famine when it comes, and the 
preventive methods which we have been bringing into 
operation one by one, arc the result of the Commission over 
which Sir Antony MacDonnell presided. The great 
programme of irrigation schemes for the whole of India to 
which we have committed ourselves, at a cost of 30 millions 
sterling in 20 years, was similarly not arrived at until Sir 
Colin Moncreiff’s Commission had spent two winters in 
India. I did not undertake University reform until I had 
carefully sifted the facts of the case by a Commission upon 
which the highest authorities had seats. Nor did we charge 
ourselves with the reform of the Police until we had 
conducted a most searching enquiry into the facts of existing 
administration in every Province by Sir A. Fraser's Commission. Finally, we did not propose to create a Railway Board or to revolutionise our railway management until we had 
obtained the advice of an expert from home. Thus, wherever 
possible, we have proceeded upon the same plan ; firstly, the 
ascertainment from the information at our disposal, from the 
representations of the public, and from the known facts, that 
there was a case for reform ; secondly, the appointment of an 
influential and representative body to go round the country 
and take evidence ; thirdly, the critical examination of their 
report, accompanied by consultation of Local Governments 
and of public opinion ; fourthly, the accomplished reform. 
I remember very well — I daresay you do also, Gentlemen— 
when the present administration was ridiculed as one of 
Commissions that were always sitting, but whose eggs 
never hatched out. I held my peace, but I sat all the 
harder. Time was all I wanted ; and now I can say that 
not a single Commission has sat and reported in my time 
without its results having been embodied with the least 
possible delay in administrative measures or in legislative 
acts. If you want to know the Educational Policy of 
Government you can find it in the published Resolution of 
March 1904; I recapitulated it in a recent farewell speech 
at Simla. If you want to know our Land Revenue Policy, 
it is similarly enunciated in two published Resolutions 
dealing with, the principles of assessment and collection, 
which will presently be followed by two others dealing with 
subsidiary branches of the question. These will then be a 
corpus or Code of Land Revenue law and policy, such as has 
never previously existed in India, and which will constitute 
a charter for the cultivating classes. If you want to know 
our Fiscal Policy it is contained in the published Despatch 
of October 1903. Thus, wherever you turn, I think you will 
find my claim justified — the case examined, the principles 
elucidated, the policy laid down, action taken and already 
bearing fruit. 

The second principle that I have held in view has been 
this. Amid the numerous races and creeds of whom India 
is composed, while I have sought to understand the needs 
and to espouse the interests of each, to win the confidence 
of the Princes, to encourage and strengthen the territorial 
aristocracy, to provide for the better education, and thus to 
increase the opportunities, of the educated classes, to 
stimulate the energies of Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist, 
and Sikh, and to befriend those classes like the Eurasians 
who are not so powerful as to have many friends of their 
own — my eye has always rested upon a larger canvas, 
crowded with untold numbers, the real people of India, as 
distinct from any class or section of the people. 

But thy poor endure 
And are with us yet ; 

Be thy name a sure 
Refuge for thy poor, 

Whom men’s eyes forget. 

It is the Indian poor, the Indian peasant, the patient, 
humble, silent millions, the 80 per cent. who subsist by 
agriculture, who know very little of policies, but who profit 
or suffer by their results, and whom men’s eyes, even the 
eyes of their own countrymen, too often forget — to whom I 
refer. He has been in the background of every policy for 
which I have been responsible, of every surplus of which I 
have assisted in the disposition. We see him not in the 
splendour and opulence, nor even in the squalor, of great 
cities : he reads no newspapers, for, as a rule, he cannot read 
at all : he has no politics. But he is the bone and sinew of 
the country, by the sweat of his brow the soil is tilled, from 
his labour comes one-fourth of the national income, he 
should be the first and the final object of every Viceroy's 
regard. 

It is for him in the main that we have twice reduced the 
salt-tax, that we remitted land revenue in two years 
amounting to nearly 24 millions sterling; for him that we 
are assessing the land revenue at a progressively lower pitch 
and making its collection elastic. It is to improve his credit 
that we have created co-operative credit societies, so that 
he may acquire capital at easy rates and be saved from the 
usury of the moneylender. He is the man whom we desire 
to lift in the world, to whose children we want to give 
education, to rescue whom from tyranny and oppression we 
have reformed the Indian Police, and from whose cabin we 
want to ward off penury and famine. Above all let us 
keep him on the soil and rescue him from bondage or 
expropriation. When I am vituperated by those who claim 
to speak for the Indian people, I feel no resentment and no 
pain. For I search my conscience and I ask myself who and 
what are the real Indian people ; and I rejoice that it has 
fallen to my lot to do something to alleviate theirs, and that 
I leave them better than I found them. As for the educated 
classes, I regret if, because I have not extended to them 
political concessions — more places on councils and so on — , 
I have in any way incurred their hostility. For I certainly 
in no wise return it, and when I remember how impartially 
it is bestowed on every Viceroy in the latter part of his term 
of office I conclude that there must be something wrong 
about all of us which brings us under a common ban. I also 
remember that in a multitude of ways even as regards places 
and appointments I have consistently befriended and 
championed their cause. That I have not offered political 
concessions is because I did not regard it as wisdom or 
statesmanship in the interests of India itself to do so ; and 
if I have incurred odium for thus doing my duty I have no 
apology to advance. 

And yet in one respect I venture to think that the classes 
of whom I am speaking have found in me their best friend. 
For I have endeavoured to pursue with them the third 
principle of action to which I before alluded, viz., to be 
frank and outspoken, to take them into open confidence as 
to the views and intentions of Government, to profit by 
public opinion, instead of ignoring it, not to flatter or 
cozen, but never to mystify or deceive. I have always held 
that Governors are servants of the public, and that policies 
are not such high and holy things as not to admit of clear 
exposition and candid argument for all who care to hear. 

I cannot say that I have everywhere been rewarded for this 
confidence. But I have pursued it as part of a definite 
policy, for there has not been an act or an aim of Government whose sincerity I have not been prepared to vindicate, and to me there is something manlier in treating your 
critics with respect than in pretending that you are unaware 
even of their existence. And my last principle, Gentlemen, 
has been everywhere to look ahead ; to scrutinize not 
merely the passing requirements of the hour, but the abiding needs of the country ; and to build not for the present but for the future. I should say that the one great fault 
of Englishmen in India is that we do not sufficiently look 
ahead. We are so much absorbed in the toil of the day 
that we leave the morrow to take care of itself. But it is 
not to-morrow only but 20 years hence, 50 years hence, and 
100 years hence. That is the thought that has never left 
my mind. I have had no ambition to cut Gordian knots 
or to win ephemeral triumphs. I am content that all my 
work should go that is not fitted to last. Some of it will 
go of course. But I hope that a solid residuum may remain and take its place as a part of the organic growth of Indian politics and Indian society. To leave India permanently stronger and more prosperous, to have added to the elements of stability in the national existence, to have 
cut out some sources of impurity or corruption, to have 
made dispositions that will raise the level of administration 
not for a year or two but continuously, to have lifted the 
people a few grades in the scale of well-being, to have 
enabled the country or the Government better to confront 
the dangers or the vicissitudes of the future, that is the 
statesman’s ambition. Whether he has attained it or not will 
perhaps not be known until long after he has disappeared. 

I need say but few words about my resignation or the 
causes that led to it. I desire only to mention one cause 
that did not. It seems to have been thought in some 
quarters at home that this was a personal quarrel, and that 
I resigned on personal grounds. No one who has the least 
acquaintance with the facts of the case, — and I would fain 
hope no one who has any acquaintance with myself, — could 
commit this error. The post of Viceroy of India is not 
one which any man fit to hold it would resign for any but 
the strongest reasons. When you remember that to me 
it was the dream of my childhood, the fulfilled ambition of 
my manhood, and my highest conception of duty to the 
State, when further you remember that I was filling it for 
the second time, a distinction which I valued much less 
for the compliment than for the opportunity afforded to 
me of completing the work to which I had given all the 
best of my life, you may judge whether I should be likely 
heedlessly or impulsively to lay it down. No, Sir, there is 
not a man in this room who does not know that I resigned 
for a great principle, or rather for two great principles, 
firstly, the hitherto uncontested, the essential, and in the 
long run the indestructible subordination of military to civil 
authority in the administration of all well-conducted States, 
and, secondly, the payment of due and becoming regard to 
Indian authority in determining India’s need. I am making 
no vain boast when I say that in defending these principles 
as I have sought to do, and in sacrificing my position 
sooner than sacrifice them, I have behind me the whole of 
the Civil Services in India, the unanimous weight of non-official English opinion in this country, an overpowering preponderance of Indian opinion, and I will add, which is 
more significant still, the support of the greater part of 
the Indian Army. I have not one word to say in derogation of those who may hold opposite views ; but speaking for the last time as Viceroy of India, I am entitled to say 
why in a few hours I shall cease to be Viceroy of India; 
and I am also entitled to point out that in speaking for the 
last time as Viceroy of the country which I have administered for nearly 7 years, I am speaking, as I believe that no single one of my predecessors has ever been able to do to a similar extent, with the whole of that country behind me. And, Gentlemen, you may depend upon it, the 
principles have not vanished though they have momentarily 
disappeared. They will reappear, and that before very 
long. 

It is a much pleasanter subject to turn from myself 
to the nobleman whose ship is hourly drawing nearer 
to these shores, and who the day after to-morrow will 
take over the task that I lay down. It is a pleasure to 
me to be succeeded by a lifelong friend. But it is a much 
greater pleasure to know that India will gain a Viceroy of 
ripe experience, of a strong sense of duty, of sound judgment, and of great personal charm. I hope that the rough seas through which I have sometimes ridden may leave 
smooth waters in which his keel may glide, and from the 
depth of my heart I wish him a tranquil and triumphant 
Viceroyalty. 

And now, as the moment comes for me to utter the 
parting words, I am a little at a loss to know what they 
should be. A week ago a man said to me, ‘ Do you really 
love India ?' I could not imagine if he was jesting. ‘ Love 
India,’ I replied; ‘why otherwise should I have cut myself 
adrift from my own country for the best seven years of my 
life, why should I have given to this country the best of 
my poor health and strength, why should I have come back 
in the awful circumstances of a year ago, why should I have 
resigned my office sooner than see injury done to her now ? ’ 
'Good,’ he said, ‘I was merely trying you— I knew it as 
well as every one else.' 

Gentlemen, you all know it. There is not a man in 
this room, there is not an impartial man in India, there is 
not a Bengali patriot who now denounces me for giving 
him the boon for which he will one day bless my name, 
who does not know that no Englishman ever stepped on 
to the shores of India who had a more passionate devotion 
to the country than he who is now bidding it farewell.
Nor will any Englishman ever have left it more resolved, to 
the best of his humble abilities and strength, to continue to 
do justice in England to India — India who after 200 years 
still stands like some beautiful stranger before her captors, 
so defenceless, so forlorn, so little understood, so little 
known. She stands in need as much as ever — perhaps 
more than ever, when such strange experiments arc made 
by many whose knowledge of her does not extend beyond 
the fringe of her garment — of being championed and spoken 
for and saved from insult or defamation. Perhaps my 
voice for India may not always be identical with that of all 
her sons, for some of them, as I have said, see or speak 
very differently from me. But it will be a voice raised on 
behalf not of a section or a faction, but, so far as the claim 
may be made, of all India. And in any case, it will be of 
an India whose development must continue to be a British 
duty, whose fair treatment is a test of British character, 
and whose destinies are bound up with those of the British 
race. So far as in me lies it will be a voice raised in the 
cause of imperial justice and fair dealing ; and most of all 
of seeing that Indian interests arc not bartered away or 
sacrificed or selfishly pawned in the financial or economic 
adjustments of Empire. 

A hundred times in India have I said to myself. Oh 
that to every Englishman in this country, as he ends his 
work, might be truthfully applied the phrase "Thou hast 
loved righteousness and hated iniquity." No man has, 
I believe, ever served India faithfully of whom that could 
not be said. All other triumphs arc tinsel and sham. 
Perhaps there are few of us who make anything but a poor 
approximation to that ideal. But let it be our ideal all the 
same. To fight for the right, to abhor the imperfect, the 
unjust, or the mean, to swerve neither to the right hand nor 
to the left, to care nothing for flattery or applause or 
odium or abuse — it is so easy to have any of them in 
India — never to let your enthusiasm be soured or your courage grow dim, but to remember that the Almighty 
has placed your hand on the greatest of his ploughs, in 
whose furrow the nations of the future are germinating and 
taking shape, to drive the blade a little forward in your 
time, and to feel that somewhere among these millions you 
have left a little justice or happiness or prosperity, a sense 
of manliness or moral dignity, a spring of patriotism, a 
dawn of intellectual enlightenment, or a stirring of duty, 
where it did not before exist — that is enough, that is the 
Englishman's justification in India. It is good enough for 
his watchword while he is here, for his epitaph when he is 
gone. I have worked for no other aim. Let India be 
my judge. 
