
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Linlithgow
Audience: Muslim community of Bombay
Date: 17 April 1936
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Mr. President and Members of the Muslim Community, - I thank you very sincerely for the warm welcome which you have accorded to Lady Linlithgow 
 and myself to-day, and I am most grateful to you, Sir, 
for the appreciative manner in which you have referred 
to my work as Chairman of the Royal Commission on 
Agriculture and as Chairman of the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee on Indian Constitutional Reforms . 

It was with particular pleasure that I listened to 
the assurance in your address of the ready co-operation
of the Muslim community in working the Reforms in the 
spirit in which they have been offered. It is my earnest 
hope that I may look for the same co-operation from all 
sections of the people of India, regardless of class or 
creed, and that the period of my office as Viceroy may be 
marked by an ever growing appreciation of the decisive 
importance of national unity which will transcend any 
local or sectional differences. It is in the unity of her 
people that the future strength of India lies. It will be 
my sincere and unchanging purpose in the work that lies 
before me to do all that I can to contribute to that unity : 
and with that object in view, it will be my aim constantly 
to hold the balance even between all sections, classes and 
creeds of the population of this great country. 

You refer also in your address to the problem of the 
economic development of the country and of the amelioration of the condition of the masses. I fully appreciate the vital importance of both those problems ; and you "may 
rest assured of my close and active interest in them. My 
investigations as Chairman of the Royal Commission on 
Agriculture have familiarised me with the various aspects 
of the question of agricultural development, and I have 
followed, with the attention which they merit, the difficult 
but most important issues involved in the development of 
those manufacturing and other industries which concern 
so closely your city and Presidency. I understand that 
already there are some signs of general recovery. India 
with her astonishing powers of recuperation has weathered 
the storm of economic depression more successfully than 
many other countries and I feel that though progress as 
yet is slow, it is sound and such as to justify confident 
hope for the future. 

I thank you once again, Mr. President for the 
cordiality of your welcome and for your good wishes to 
Lady Linlithgow and myself in the difficult task that lies ahead of us. We are delighted to have had this 
opportunity of meeting the representatives of the Muslim 
Community of Bombay in whose welfare you may rest 
assured that we shall continue to take the keenest 
interest. 