
Title:  ADDRESSES FROM REPRESENTATIVES OF DISTRICTS IN BOMBAY PRESIDENCY AND SIND
Speaker: Lord Hardinge
Audience: Representatives of Bombay Presidency and Sindh
Date: 3 April 1916
Location: Mumbai
Notes: 
Additional Audiences: Indian princes, Sir Jamsetjee Jijibhoy and other dignitaries

Speech: 

Gentlemen, — I have made three speeches to-day, and I understand that I am to make another one to-morrow; so I am sure that you will forgive me if I do not say more than a few words of thanks for the extraordinary demonstration of kindly feeling in which you have all just taken part, and will acquit me of any discourtesy in my inability to receive and reply to each of thesefarewell addresses 'separately. Time has not permitted the reading of all these addresses, but through the courtesy of some of the Associations that are presenting these I have been permitted to see advance copies. 

From them I gather that it is the general desire of the Bombay Presidency to express regret at my departure, and gratitude for the small services I have been able to render to India during the past years, while the various addresses dwell some upon one and some upon another feature of the events of that period. 

Those events have been summarised, so far as the administration of India goes, in a document containing over one hundred and twenty pages, and if I should attempt to reproduce such a review to you now, I should be still standing talking to you here some hours after the departure of my ship to-morrow. 

I think you will agree with me that when so many representative bodies have surveyed the outstanding features of my administration in eulogistic phraseology it would hardly become me to question their judgment. These are the functions of the future historian, but if his verdict is at all favourable to me and if he should cast about for some explanation of any small success I may have had as Viceroy, I will give him this hint. I have trusted India, I have believed in India, I have hoped with India, I have feared with India, I have wept with India, I have rejoiced with India, and in a word I have identified myself with India. Indians response has been a wonderful revelation to me, and sometimes I feel as if she had in return confided her very heart to my keeping. 

I should like to take this opportunity of saying one word about the energy and generosity shown by Bombay in the work of alleviating suffering caused by the war. Immediately on the outbreak of war steps were taken, under the able guidance of His Excellency the Governor and of Lady Willingdon, to organise a Bombay Relief Fund and with the money freely subscribed by all classes in the city and Presidency of Bombay, to prepare for the supply of comforts to our soldiers in the field and for the reception of the wounded on their return to India. It is owing to the forethought and untiring labour bestowed upon these preparations that the hardships and sufferings of many of our gallant soldiers both in the field and in hospital have been reduced to a minimum. Both money and personal service have been most freely and generously given not as a duty, but with a ready desire to do all that is possible to secure success for our arms. The public spirit of Bombay has indeed been splendid. In thanking Bombay most warmly for all that she has done, I should like specially to mention Lady Willingdon, whose personal popularity and capacity for organisation have been of the greatest value in producing these great results; and to express my appreciation of the self-sacrificing labours of all those ladies and gentlemen of all communities who have so unsparingly seconded her efforts. 

This little ceremony, in which you have all so graciously performed your several parts, means, if it means 
anything, that you wish to assure me that, in your opinion at any rate, I have not betrayed my trust. Tomorrow I take my farewell of Bombay City, and to-day in bidding good-bye to the Bombay Presidency let me thank you with all my heart for coming, some of you so far, to prove your good-will towards me, and for sending me borne, sad indeed at severing my connection with India, but happy in the consciousness that India feels kindly disposed towards me, and gives me credit at any rate for having tried to do my duty. No words can adequately express my gratitude to you all for this most friendly demonstration on the eve of my departure. I thank you all from my heart. 