
Title: FAREWELL SPEECH FROM BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Hardinge
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 4 April 1916
Location: Mumbai
Notes: Details of who all were there and what the atmosphere was is in the book. This is a reply address and the speech being replied to is in the book.
Additional Audiences: Indian princes, Lord and Lady Willingdon, judges of the Bombay High Court, members of the Bombay Executive Council and other dignitaries

Speech: 

Gentlemen, — It is sad to feel that in a few minutes time I shall have left these shores, and that this address, that has been presented to me, is the last that I shall receive from my many friends in India, but the warmth and friendliness of its tone help to soften the pangs of regret that I feel in leaving India and so many kind people of whom I can have nothing hut grateful and affectionate remembrances. 

You were the first to welcome me to India, and I well remember how very cordial I thought your welcome was, and how I hoped to be able to retain your kindly feelings through the strenuous years that I knew lay before me. You are the last to bid me farewell, and you have made me feel, on each of the two later occasions that we have met, that your friendship towards me has been growing steadily stronger and warmer. I need hardly say how heartily I reciprocate such feelings and how highly I value the approval of such a far-sighted and distinguished body as the Municipal Corporation of the most progressive city of India. 

It is the common lot of every public man to be criticised, and even misrepresented ; and no public man should attach too much importance to these things. But not once or twice, but many times when I have been the subject of such misunderstandings I have noticed in the public opinion of Bombay a restraint of criticism and a willingness to believe that my Government and myself have not been actuated by unworthy motives nor influenced by utterly unreasonable considerations. And though I do not think I am more sensitive to criticism than other men, I tell you frankly that your friendly confidence and support have been a great help to me in difficult times. 

You have spoken of me as a diplomatist, — a character in which you also welcomed me. I confess I had my doubts at the time whether my experience as a diplomatist was likely to commend my selection to your favour, for it is not far from the truth to say that, in the general estimation, one of the highest qualifications of a successful diplomatist is the skilful use of words to conceal his thoughts. That however is not, and never has been my idea of how to succeed in diplomacy; and at any rate whatever my failures may have been, there is one little bit of credit to which. I lay claim, and it is that throughout my time in India, whether in public speeches or private conversations I have always endeavoured to say what I have really felt and what I believe to be the truth alike to India and about India, and I have always aimed at taking India into my confidence, — and here let me add that public speaking in the case of a diplomatist is almost regarded as a crime, and if I may make a confession to you, it is that the making of speeches has been one of the heaviest burdens that the lot of a Viceroy brought to me. 

You have, with a consideration for which I warmly thank you, referred once more to the work of my grandfather in India, and if words mean anything, I am justified in thinking that in your opinion at any rate I have fulfilled the ambition with which I set out for India — that I might be able at the end of my time to feel that I had done nothing to bring discredit upon his name ; for, indeed, it has been no small thing for me throughout my life, and especially here in India, to have had before me the bright example of his courage and chivalry. 

The second time upon which I had the honour to receive an address from you was in the Town Hall just two years ago, and it was an occasion that for many reasons I can never forget. The warmth of the reception that you gave on that occasion to me and to her, who is no longer with me, made an ineffaceable impression upon me, while I shall ever treasure those words of the address in which you referred to her example of sympathetic and courageous womanhood as a priceless tribute from Bombay to her memory. 

Let me also in this connection express my very warm and grateful thanks for the splendid and most generous  contributions from the Ruling Princes and the people and citizens of Bombay Presidency and City to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital for Women at Delhi, an imperishable monument to her love for India. 

This is the sixth time that I have visited Bombay, and the third address that I have had the privilege of receiving from you, and I should like to say that I miss a friendly and familiar face amongst you, that of your great citizen, Sir Pherozshah Mehta. It is a little more than a year ago that he came to see me when I was staying at Government House on my way to the Persian Gulf, and I feel for Bombay in their loss of this distinguished citizen. 

A Viceroyalty which saw at its beginning the visit of Their Majesties to India and their wonderful Durbar at Delhi and at the end this monstrous and horrible European war can never go down to history as uneventful ; and I sometimes wonder what the historian will select as the most striking fact relating to India that has occurred during that period. 

Do you not agree with me that the spectacle of India sending forth the flower of her soldiery to fight the battles of the mother-country on the far off field of Flanders — in the desolate places of Irak, in East Africa, Egypt, and elsewhere — not by brigades or divisions — not even by Army Corps, but literally by the hundred thousand — Do you not think this glorious spectacle will arrest the attention of those who write the record of these years when the heat of controversy and the dust of battle have subsided ? 

To me it will always be the proudest reflection of my life that mine were the honour and privilege of showing to my Sovereign, to my country, and the whole world, that the loyalty of India was no mere form of words. England has trusted India, and India has nobly responded, and her sons — alas! how many! — have sealed her loyalty with their life blood. You have been kind enough to suggest that my work during the preceding period of peace had something to do with this splendid result, but I claim no credit in the matter beyond this, that I was sure in my heart of hearts that India was sound, that I never hesitated to proclaim that assurance and to act upon it, and that India — ever quick to respond — has given me and my Government, and my King and country, confidence for confidence and trust for trust in overflowing measure. 

You, Gentlemen of Bombay, will hardly expect me in these last few moments to refer in any detail to the history of the past few years, though the past must weightily influence the future, and it is to the future that the eyes of India are hopefully turned. 

You know how deep my sympathies are for her aspirations, and with that knowledge you will let me say one word. Do not be too impatient. Development is already taking place with phenomenal rapidity, and even in the 5 1/2 short years that I have seen, there have been great and far-reaching changes of attitude and outlook. 

Remember, too, that progress and reform can only come with any advantage and any permanency to those that deserve such good things ; you must see to it therefore that your public men, your public opinion, your public papers are all worthy — and here in Bombay I can use such words without offence, for if the sanity of your public life, and the earnestness and ability of your public men, your respect for law and order and your business enterprise were faithfully reproduced in all quarters of this great Empire the path of progress would be far easier than it is. The key to peace and contentment of the people can, in my opinion, be found only in a spirit of sympathy and confidence between them and their Government, and I am quite certain that that spirit will be found strongly developed in my friend Lord Chelmsford. At the present stage of her development India is not a difficult country to govern, provided she can realise that Great Britain is in sympathy with her legitimate aspirations. To do this, and to maintain the confidence of India, concessions must be gradually made to political progress. In this manner, India, whose characteristic is to trust without reserve, when she recognises true sympathy, will be satisfied and 
led gently along the path of progress, developing an ever-closer understanding between herself and Great Britain, and an ever-growing loyalty to the British Crown. 

The sands are running out, and it now only remains for me to take leave of you all, to thank you once more, and to ask you to believe me when I say that I shall never forget Bombay where, from every side and from the day of my first arrival, I have received nothing but kindness and encouragement. I leave India with a deep feeling of respect and affection for the citizens of the Gate of India who, I hope, will always remember me as their true friend and a devoted friend of India and her people. May God bless India and prosper those that dwell in this land is my fervent prayer. 
