
Title: PROROGATION OF THE REFORMED INDIAN LEGISLATURE AT DELHI
Speaker: Lord Chelmsford
Audience: Houses of the Reformed Indian Legislature
Date: 29 March 1921
Location: New Delhi
Notes: Chelmsford prorogued the first Session of both Houses of the Reformed Indian Legislature on the morning of 29th March.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


The first Session of the Reformed Indian Legislature 
has come to an end, and I am here to prorogue it with the 
ceremony which is traditional in the Mother of Parliaments. Throughout the Session your distinguished Presidents have led you in the paths of Parliamentary practice and I am 
confident that you all have wished to be so led and to conduct 
your business in a manner consonant with the highest traditions of Parliamentary procedure. 

On you has fallen a very special responsibility— the 
responsibility of founding a tradition, and I congratulate 
you on the manner in which you have risen to the height of your great opportunity. Government and non-officials alike were unfamiliar with the new procedure and if mistakes have 
been made they were due to that unfamiliarity. But after 
all it is not so much the letter which matters, but the spirit — 
the spirit which giveth life. And what of the spirit which 
has informed your deliberations? I make bold to say that 
the tone and temper of your deliberations have been the outstanding feature of the past Session. Non- officials have shown a sense of balance and responsibility in their treatment 
of great questions, and the Government have endeavoured 
to give the fullest possible effect, consistent with their own 
responsibility to Parliament, to the governing principles of 
the new Constitution. The working of a Constitution, believe 
me, is no easy task. Any Constitution can be reduced to an 
absurdity if its constituent parts are unmindful of their 
responsibility to work it with good-will and fair play. British 
Constitutional institutions have flourished because of the 
spirit which has informed those who work them. It may 
interest you to be reminded of what Mr. Gladstone wrote of 
the British Constitution — “ The British Constitution ” he 
said “ leaves open doors which lead into blind alleys ; for 
it presumes more boldly than any other, the good sense and 
good faith of those who work it. If unhappily, these person- 
ages meet together, on the great arena of a nation’s fortunes, 
as jockeys meet upon a race-course, each to urge to the uttermost, as against the other, the power of the animal he rides, or as counsel in Court, each to procure the victory of his 
client, without respect to any other interest or right ; then 
this boasted Constitution of ours is neither more nor less than 
a heap of absurdities ”. Mr. Gladstone then goes on to depict 
how each portion of the Constitution could wreck the working 
of the whole by a strict adherence to the letter of its powers. 
He proceeds however — “ But the assumption is that the depositaries of, power will all respect one another ; will evince a consciousness that they are working in a common interest for 
a common aim ; that they will be possessed, together, with 
not less than an average intelligence, of not less than an 
average sense of equity and of public interest and rights.” 

It is in the spirit of this passage that my Government have 
approached the new Constitution. It is in the spirit of this 
passage that members have worked this Session. Even the 
British Constitution, as Mr. Gladstone has shown, may break 
down if it is worked in any way other than that of mutual 
respect and in a common interest for a common aim. It 
is, then, in the belief that it is with good sense and good-will 
that the new Constitution will be worked that I have faith in 
what I have set my hand to. 

It is the first step which counts, and this first Session should 
go far to dispel the doubts of those who have looked upon our 
new constitutional departure with gloomy forebodings ; it 
should go far to hearten those who are pledged to fight the 
constitutional cause against the forces of disorder and anarchy. 
But for those who have displayed such conspicuous wisdom 
and courage in launching the new Constitution on right lines, 
there still remains work to do. There is need for the spreading of the constitutional gospel in the country. You will then, I hope, in your recess make an organised effort to teach 
people what this reformed Constitution means ; that real 
powers — not sham — are vested in the Councils, and how 
surely through these Councils progress must come. 

And now it falls to my lot to bid you farewell. Before 
you meet again another will stand in my place, one who is 
marked out by achievement, by experience and by character 
as offering the promise of a great Viceroyalty. I know I can 
assure him of a warm and hearty reception on the part of you 
all. He will find difficulties to meet him, but they are, I 
think, less than they appeared likely to be some six or seven 
weeks ago. My constant thought and endeavour has been to 
smooth his path and in that I believe I have been in large 
measure successful. But I would not in saying this be unmindful of the mission of healing in which His Royal Highness the Duke of Connaught played so conspicuous and great a part. 
India has had on many occasions reason to be grateful to its 
British Emperors. This last visit of His Royal Highness, 
taken at the instance and by command of His Majesty, is one 
more proof of the constant solicitude of His Majesty for the 
well-being of his Indian subjects. 

We have gone through troublous times during the past 
five years, but I ask you to look upon India’s position in the 
Empire and at home in 1916 and to-day. She has now an 
assured position in the Imperial Cabinet and her sons voice 
her views at its meetings. At home Indians occupy the highest 
posts in Government, are responsible for the policy in those 
subjects which go to promote a country’s well-being and in 
the rest exercise a far-reaching influence. In the sphere of the 
Indian Legislature you know your powers and in the Provincial Councils the powers and responsibility are even greater. 

And all this has been accomplished during a period disturbed by war and the aftermath of war ; nor was it at the expense of India’s effort, for no one can gainsay that effort nor its 
decisive influence upon the war. My participation in your 
affairs is now at an end. It has been a high privilege to have 
been your Governor-General during this great epoch. It is 
for you now to justify our great adventure. I have no fear 
that you will fall short of what is required of you. What is 
well begun is half done. Continue to exhibit the courage, 
the sobriety, the sense of responsibility of this first Session and 
there can be no doubt that your labours will not be in vain. 
I commend both you and them to the guidance of divine Providence. 

I now declare this Session prorogued. 

