
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S FAREWELL ADDRESS TO THE CHAMBER OF PRINCES ON THURSDAY, THE 14TH OCTOBER 1943
Speaker: Lord Linlithgow
Audience: Chamber of Princes
Date: 14 October 1943
Location: New Delhi
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Your Highnesses — I am very glad to meet Your Highnesses again, and to have this opportunity before I lay down my present office of saying these words of farewell to you.
I realise only too well how great the inconvenience is 
which many of Your Highnesses have suffered in visiting 
Delhi in present difficulties of accommodation and transport, and I am the more grateful to you all for your presence, in numbers unprecedented since the inauguration 
of the Chamber, here today. 

This, the 19th meeting of the Chamber of Princes, 
since its inauguration in 1921, is the last of six such meetings  
over which I have had the honour of presiding and, owing 
to various difficulties which prevented our assembling as 
usual in March, has had to be postponed up to the very 
verge of my departure from India. But I am glad to think 
that since we last met the face of the war has changed in 
a manner that even the most optimistic of us could hardly 
have hoped for. Today we can look back on the great and 
splendid achievements of the fighting forces in every 
theatre of war through the months that have passed since 
we last came together. The great changes that have taken 
place, the outstanding victories of the Allied arms, have 
brought us very perceptibly nearer to the goal we are all 
so anxious to reach. And they have brought us perceptibly 
nearer, too, to the point at which the investigation and 
the solution of post-war problems is a matter of immediate 
and imperative necessity. 

Let me first pay tribute to the memory of those who 
are no longer with us. Since our last meeting, six members of the Chamber have passed away— Their highnesses of Bikaner, Jhalawar, Ajaigarh and Jhabua, the Raja of 
Khilchipur and the Raja of Kurundwad (Junior) who was
a Representative Member. Aad I have just heard with 
very great regret of the death of His Highness the Maharaja of Cochin, whose State I had the pleasure of visiting less than two months ago, and who had done so much in 
the short period of his rule for the good of his people. 

His Highness the Chancellor will be voicing our tribute to these departed Princes. I will only add to what I have already said this morning about His Highness of 
Bikaner, a special word of deep regret at the untimely 
demise of His Highness of Jhalawar, a prince of exceptional 
promise, selflessly devoted to the discharge of his high 
responsibilities. Rarely, if ever, did he fail to attend the 
meetings of this Chamber, and his absence today leaves 
a gap which we all deplore. 

To those who have succeeded to Rulership and 
membership of this Chamber I offer a most cordial welcome. 
To His Highness of Bikaner we confidently look to carry 
on the great services rendered to the Order of Princes by 
his illustrious father. It is a pleasure, too, to see here today 
for the first time the Maharaja Scindia of Gwalior and 
Their Highnesses of Dhrangadhra, Manipur and Jhabua, 
and also the Rajas of Baghat and Kurundwad (Senior) 
and the Rao of Jigni who have been elected as Representative Members since our last meeting. Nor must I omit to mention the recent admission to membership of the Raja of 
Shahpura, the Nawab of Kurwai and the Rajas of Talcher, 
Kaisia and Phaltan, four of whom we are glad to welcome 
in person today. 

I have spoken already of the magnificent progress that 
has been made in every theatre of the war by the Allied 
arms, progress so profoundly encouraging to all of us who 
have been through the dark days through which we have
lived since the beginning of the war. Much still lies 
before us. It will be a mistake to underestimate the 
strength and the determination of the forces that are 
opposed to us. We may yet have many anxious months 
before victory is achieved. But it is a happiness to me 
before I leave India to be able to feel that circumstances 
have so amply justified the guarded optimism which I 
permitted myself in previous addressees to this Chamber. 
And it is a happiness to me too, to be able with pride 
and gratitude for the last time to review the services 
which have been rendered by the Princes of India in this 
titanic struggle. 

Naturally, my thoughts turn first to the sphere of 
active operations and I would at the outset warmly thank and congratulate those of Your Highnesses who have been able to hearten and encourage the troops by personal visits 
to the various Fronts. 

I would wish, too, to pay a special tribute to the invaluable assistance in the war effort that has been given by His Highness the Chancellor. Not only has His 
Highness rendered service of great value one of the 
Representatives of India at the War Cabinet. He has 
taken advantage of his absence from India to perform 
sterling service as one of the spokesmen of this great 
country overseas. And he has spared no pains to acquaint 
himself in the fullest detail with the organisation of war effort in the United Kingdom. I hope that in the course of this session we shall hear from His Highness himself 
some account of his experiences. But, for myself, I would 
like to add my testimony to the value of his contribution, 
the importance of the contacts he has made, the encouragement that his visit has given to the troops and to the munition workers that he has visited. 

The Indian States Forces have taken full advantage 
of the opportunities that have come to them to win fresh 
distinction on the battlefield. Comparisons are rash. And 
such distinction is of course largely dependant upon 
opportunity. But I would mention the gallant record of 
the Kashmir Mountain Battery, the 1st Patiala Infantry, 
the Jind Infantry, the Jodhpur Sardar Infantry, two 
Jaipur Battalions, the Tripura Rifles and the Tehri- 
Garhwal and Malerkotla Sappers and Miners. Nor should 
I fail to record my gratitude for the manner in which 
the States as a whole have adopted the scheme devised to 
raise the standard of efficiency among the higher ranks of 
their Forces. I realise and appreciate the difficulties that 
may on occasion confront Your Highnesses in these and 
other connected matters. But I know too that you on 
your part will recognise that the first duty of the Military 
Adviser-in-Chief is to devise schemes to rectify such deficiencies as come to notice under the stress and strain of war. A new scheme for the exchange of officers, and 
another for providing advanced training for State units 
will I understand shortly be put forward. I am convinced that Your Highnesses will continue to view such 
proposals with sympathy and realism, and that I and my 
successor can look for your full co-operation over them. 

Nor has the active aid of the States in the actual war 
zones been confined to combatant units. Invaluable assistance, at a time of very real and pressing need, has been lent by the Indian States in providing labour units for 
the construction of roads and aerodromes. Our gratitude 
is due in very special measure to the great States of the 
South, whose contributions in this sphere have been, and 
continue to be, outstanding. From Travancore and Cochin 
over 70,000 men have travelled north to carve out roads 
to be traversed by the fighting soldiers, and in doing so 
to face the perils of disease. Those who have laid down 
their lives side by side with the fighting man in the fever 
infested belts in which so much has had to be done, have 
sacrificed themselves as truly as any fighting soldier for 
their motherland, and we salute their memory today. 

But it is not only to humble homes that the war has 
brought sad and untimely bereavements. I spoke last year 
of an Heir-Apparent who had met his death in the course 
of his duties as an officer of the Indian Air Force. Since 
then a similar blow has fallen upon two other members of 
this Chamber and I feel sure that Your Highnesses would 
wish me to tender deep sympathy and condolences to the 
Raja of Sangli and the Maharaja of Mayurbhanj. 

For the rest, contributions and offers of personal 
services, aircraft, buildings, labour, watercraft, machinery, 
training facilities and medical aid, donations and gifts of 
every sort and description, have continued to pour in from 
Indian States in an ever widening stream. I cannot speak 
too highly of the magnificent response consistently made 
by the Indian States to the urgent needs of this critical 
time. They have shown unstinted generosity and co-operation : thanks to their help, great aerodromes, strategical projects of every kind, have sprung up in the 
territory of the Indian States. Facilities of every kind 
have been most readily granted not only to British and 
Indian forces, but to the forces of our Allies ; and in 
particular certain States, at the cost of wide stretches of famous forests most carefully guarded in the past, have helped immensely in the training of men in the new science 
of jungle warfare. 

I referred in my last address to the steadily expanding scope of measures to achieve the maximum co-ordination of effort between the States and British India. 
Instances of such co-operation could be multiplied indefinitely and there is no time to catalogue them today. But I would make mention of one notable incident in which a 
group of hostile agents were arrested with most commendable promptitude almost immediately after they had 
landed from an enemy submarine on the shores of an 
Indian State. Further and most valuable demonstrations of this united front, as between the States and Provinces, are to be found in the more prosaic but not less
vital sphere of war time legislation, where States have 
most willingly and comprehensively applied to their territories the British Indian Ordinances and other arrangements devised to meet the various emergencies which have 
been constantly arising. 

Let me add one further instance in which the States 
and their subjects are making an important contribution 
to our resources. The Indian Posts and Telegraphs 
Department was, up to the outbreak of war, functioning 
on commercial lines as a self-supporting organisation 
making no contribution to the general revenues of British 
India. Such an arrangement is of course only fair to the 
States who by entering, as the vast majority of them have 
done, into postal unity with British India, undertook no 
liability to submit to indirect taxation in the form of surcharges on the normal economic rates for the transmission 
of letters and telegrams. The exigencies of war time 
finance have however compelled the Government of India, 
following in this matter the lead of the Government of 
the United Kingdom, to raise the postal and telegraphic 
rates for the express purpose of making a substantial surplus available as a contribution towards war expenditure. It was of course impracticable to confine this process to 
British India, and it is with deep appreciation that I 
learn that the States are pressing no objection to the 
additional financial burden which it places on themselves 
and on their subjects. The financial value of that burden 
cannot immediately be precisely computed. But given 
the areas and the populations affected, it cannot but be 
substantial. And its acceptance is yet another and a most valuable voluntary contribution by the Indian States towards the prosecution of the war. 

The same uniform and wholehearted co-operation has 
been shown in regard to those grim problems of the war 
have been so distressingly prominent during the 
year—food, cloth, inflation. In our efforts to 
combat the food crisis we have had the benefit of full 
association at every stage with accredited representatives
of the States. Those who have a surplus have freely 
placed it at our disposal. Those in deficiency have of 
course participated in the common resources: I could but 
wish that those resources had proved more adequate to 
their needs. I have particularly in mind the States of 
Travancore and Cochin which, deprived of their normal 
supplies of Burma rice, have borne a particularly heavy 
burden. I would like to pay a tribute both to the efforts 
made by the States Governments concerned, with which 
I was able to acquaint myself at first hand during my 
recent visit to South India to cope with a situation so 
distressing, and to the patience and fortitude of the population so sorely tried. 

All over India the States have lent full support to 
the “ Grow more food ” campaign. I would beg them to 
continue and if possible to increase that support. The 
need is great — we must leave nothing undone not merely 
to banish the threat of famine, but to accumulate those 
reserves of food that are so important a guarantee for the 
future. 

To those States of Rajputana where sudden floods 
have recently caused such grave loss of life and property. 
our sympathy and our admiration of the courage and 
energy with which all concerned have applied themselves 
to work of remedy and repairs go out in full measure. 

In the steps that have had to be taken to remedy the 
shortage of cloth there is the same record of friendly 
helpfulness. Many important centres of the textile industry are situated in Indian States, and I am deeply grateful to the States concerned for the manner in which they 
have placed the products of their looms at the disposal of 
the Central Government ; often at no small sacrifice to 
themselves. 

Inflation is one of the gravest problems that faces us 
today. It is a problem in the handling of which the States 
and British India are equally concerned, and in which 
they have a common interest. Action to combat inflation 
is essential, for it is a threat to every one of us, and to 
India as a whole. I realise that anti-inflationary 
measures present a complex problem in the case of the 
States, having regard to the varying conditions of their 
fiscal arrangements and their relative backwardness in 
industrial development. But I know that Your Highnesses 
share my view that the question is one that must be resolutely tackled. And I look for valuable results from the discussions that I myself have had with some of you on 
this topic, discussions which my Political Adviser is, on 
my behalf, continuing and developing during this week. 
I would like to take this opportunity to make it clear 
beyond any question that such checks and prohibitions as 
it has been necessary to apply are based solely upon the 
present overriding need to conserve and regulate the 
resources of the country as a whole so that the output of 
essential supplies should not be curtailed or disturbed for 
the benefit of local or personal interests. There is not, and there cannot be, any question of their being designed to stifle the birth, of the progress of industrial development in the Indian States.

Matters such as these, and others too numerous to 
mention, will of course come under review in connection
with post-war development and reconstruction. The plans 
of the Central Government for dealing with that great 
problem are already well advanced. I am glad to be able 
to assure Your Highnesses that they contain full provision 
for associating your States with its numerous ramifications, 
and I am glad too to think that many of your ablest 
Ministers are included in the various Committees that are 
being set up. 

Public opinion must inevitably take the closest interest in these activities of reconstruction. I am the more grateful for the response of so many States to the advice 
which I offered to you at our last session in regard to the 
National War Front movement. That movement was established when the war outlook was dark and threatening. As the intervening months have passed, it was developed into a 
publicity organisation concerned with every aspect of public morale. It is some measure of Your Highness’ support of this vital work that in 15 months, 287 States have 
brought War Front organisations into being. That is a 
response of which the States have every right to be proud 
and, as the founder of the Movement, I congratulate 
Your Highnesses on it. And though the name of the 
War Front Movement must ultimately die, the spirit and 
work behind it should live. For it contains tremendous 
potentialities for establishing means by which the good 
in man and in life may be more widely known and the 
things that are evil challenged and destroyed. 

Before I leave the dominating topic of the war I 
would add a few words of appreciation of the generosity 
shown by so many of Your Highnesses towards refugees 
from other countries whose sufferings have been immensely 
greater than ours. In particular I have in mind your 
aid towards establishing a temporary refuge in India for 
a great number of Polish children. Here again I must 
refer to the outstanding energy and personal interest, and 
to the most generous personal aid, which has been given 
by His Highness the Chancellor. What he has done for 
Polish children will long be remembered, not only by those 
children to whom his kindness has been so real, but by the 
great Polish nation. I should mention also the similar 
settlement in the Kolhapur State where facilities have 
been most readily and generously provided and where 
the personal sympathy of Her Highness the Maharani 
Regent has been of the utmost value.


Time presses and I have much to say on matters of
even greater importance, but I could not forgive myself 
if I failed today to thank Your Highnesses for your lavish 
support in two matters unconnected with the war but 
specially near to the hearts of Her Excellency and myself, 
I refer of course to my wife’s Anti-Tuberculosis campaign 
and to the activities of the All-India Cattle Show Society, 

I cannot over-estimate ray sense of the importance of 
the Anti-Tuberculosis campaign. It is I am certain of 
profound significance to the future of this country. And 
it is a very real happiness to my wife, who has spared no 
effort for it during her time here, and to myself, to think 
that we leave India with the campaign against this scourage 
so firmly established. The support of the All-India Cattle 
Show Society by more than 60 States has been continuous 
and invaluable. I am grateful in particular that it should 
have been greater even than before in this current year 
in spite of the other numerous demands on your resources. 
I feel certain that the work of the Society merits in the 
fullest degree the friendly co-operation of Your Highnesses,
and that it responds to instincts deeply rooted in every 
great agricultural country. The fighting against tuberculosis, the struggle to improve India’s cattle and so the condition of the peasant and the countryside, are very 
close to the hearts of both of us, and my wife and I, I can 
assure you, will in the days after we have left India, continue to take the liveliest and most vivid interest in both. 

I turn now to a different field, and I would ask Your 
Highnesses to bear with me while I indulge in some reflections on more basic and possibly more controversial matters, reflections prompted by seven and a half years of such 
intimate association with the intricate and sometimes 
baffling problems presented by the Indian States and by 
the real and sincere interest which I have always taken in 
them and in their welfare. It has been suggested to me more 
than once that the immense aggregate importance of these 
States as an element in the Indian continent, and their 
vital concern in the solution of all Indian problems, have 
not always been fully appreciated. I cannot believe that 
that can be the case, or that any well-informed observer 
can fail to realise the vast area which the Indian States 
occupy, the size of their population, their great resources, 
the outstanding place which they hold in the history of 
India, and the extent to which the future of this great sub-continent must be, and is, of immediate and profound concern to them. But the very size and importance of the 
Indian States as a whole makes the problems that Your 
Highnesses, and the Crown Representative of the day, have 
to face the more significant. 

Your Highnesses have often heard me refer both to 
my previous addresses to this Chamber, and in other places, 
to my own view of the significance and value of the 
Federal scheme which was the coping-stone of the Act of 
1935. There was no doubt much that could be said in point 
of detail against that scheme. Equally, as I have said 
before, much could have been and can be urged against 
any scheme that can be devised for the constitutional 
future of India. But just as I have always believed that 
the Federal scheme was the best answer that could at 
that time have been devised for the problems of British 
India, equally it was, and is my sincere belief that such a 
scheme , is the best answer from the point of view of the 
Indian States, and from the point of view of India as a 
whole. Events beyond our control have necessitated 
changes in our plains, and to some extent have altered the 
circumstances with which we have to deal and in which 
we have to build. But speaking here to Your Highnesses 
today for the last time I wish to reaffirm my faith and 
confidence in the Federal ideal, and in the contribution 
which the realisation with general support of that ideal, 
whatever adjustments might prove necessary in regard 
to particular aspects of it, would make to Indian unity 
and to the constitutional future of India. 

And when I speak of unity I need not emphasise to 
Your Highnesses the importance of all of us standing together in the conditions of the modern world. It is very difficult for units, however, large ; whatever their 
form of Government ; whatever their resources, to 
exist save in relation to, and as part of, a larger whole. 
The bonds that link units one to another may be light as gossamer. But they exist : they are there : and their strength and their significance cannot be denied. If that is true of a 
continent as large as Europe, it is true, I am certain, 
equally of this great sub-continent of India : And inside 
that sub-continent it holds good equally especially when 
common interests are so largely involved, of the Indian 
States. That that unity is wholly consistent with the survival and the orderly development of the Indian States; that the Indian states with their distinguished history ; 
with their special relations with the Crown so fully 
recognised, based as they are on treaties, sanads, and 
engagements ; with their long tradition, can make a great 
and useful contribution to India's future I never have 
doubted, and I do not doubt today. It must be our business to see in what way that contribution can best be made, and what best can be its character. 

I spoke just now of survival accompanied by development. The juxtaposition of these two words is of deep 
and vital significance, as I know that Your Highnesses 
fully realise. There have been great developments of 
recent years, profound changes, new forces, new ideas, a 
new attitude of mind in the international field. All these 
facts have to be taken into account. And in the face of 
them you and I, who have to live in the world of today, 
must think and act realistically. It would be an injustice 
to Your Highnesses were I to assume that any reasonable 
man amongst you would deny that the Crown’s obligations 
to protect carry with them equally binding responsibilities 
to ensure, if need be, that what is protected continues to 
be worthy of protection. On the contrary I am glad to 
think that that most important proposition is widely 
accepted among you. I can claim during the period of 
my Viceroyalty to have spared no effort to assist Your 
Highnesses to give effect to the principles that underlie it.
And I should indeed have regarded it not only as a dereliction of my duty but as a grave disservice to the 
Princely Order had I in the least degree relaxed my efforts 
to do so. 

When I last addressed this Chamber I referred to 
three particular directions towards which those efforts 
were, in consultation and co-operation with Your Highnesses, being exerted.

I spoke firstly of the decisive necessity in regard to 
the smaller States of some form of co-operative measures 
to secure a standard of administrative efficiency which is 
beyond their individual resources. That progress has since 
continued with encouraging results— particularly in Eastern 
India, from which area I am glad to see so many Rulers 
present today. I congratulate them on what they have 
been able to achieve and I look forward with confidence 
to its consolidation and extension. In other areas too 
progress has been made and new ideas are afoot. But I 
have become increasingly conscious of the difficulties 
which arise, not so much from any lack of enthusiasm on 
the part of the Rulers Concerned as from the nature of the 
foundations on which they have to build. I devoutly wish 
that these difficulties could before my departure from 
India have been surmounted by the formulation and 
application of general principles acceptable to all concerned. But in matters so delicate undue haste might well have defeated the object in view. I have had to content 
myself therefore with giving instructions that the progress 
hitherto achieved and the difficulties thereby revealed shall 
within the next few weeks be systematically reviewed and 
considered by my advisers, so that thereafter, so soon as 
can conveniently be arranged, my successor may be able 
to initiate discussions either with the Standing Committee 
or with selected representatives of the category of States 
principally concerned, from which discussions a clear plan 
of action may emerge. I appeal most earnestly to Your 
Highnesses to co-operate whole-heartedly in these processes. 
For I regard them, and I cannot emphasise this too strongly 
as being literally of vital importance for the vast majority 
of you. 

Your Highnesses will realise that measures such as 
these to which I now refer, involving as they do a certain 
measure of sacrifice on the part of those small units to 
which I have mentioned, do at the same time represent a 
most valuable contribution to the improvement of administration, and to the removal of criticism, consistently with the survival and development, by means of co-operation 
among themselves or under the aegis of larger States, of the 
smaller States affected. The sacrifices involved, as I have 
observed to Your Highnesses on previous occasions, are 
an inevitable accompaniment of the co-operative method. 
But I feel no shadow of doubt that they are justified in 
terms of the benefits involved, whether we test those 
benefits by the improvement of the standard of administrative services and amenities or by wider political considerations. A heavy obligation rests upon us all. And 
that obligation makes it difficult— and I am certain that 
Your Highnesses agree with me, to view with equanimity 
conditions in which, owing to the smallness of the area, 
or of the resources, of individual States, it may be 
impossible to secure the application of modern standards 
of justice, or of administration, to the inhabitants of the 
area concerned. 

I would add that the line of argument which I have 
been following in regard to small States is no less applicable to the Jagirs and Thikanas which, though forming an integral part of certain States, still maintain some 
semblance of jurisdictional and administrative machinery.
Let me make it clear beyond any question that the times 
are no longer propitious for Jagirdars and Thakurs who 
seeks to assert or perpetuate a semi-independence wholly 
incompatible with their limited resources, and so, inevitably harmful to the interests of the inhabitants of the areas concerned. 

I spoke also at the last session of this Chamber of a 
scheme for safeguarding standards of administrations
particularly after the period of a Ruler's minority, by the 
application of formal constitutional methods for the transaction of State business, I referred too to the difficult and delicate problem of determining what proportion of 
a State's revenue can appropriately be earmarked for the 
use of the Ruler and his family, and what precisely are 
the items which should legitimately come within the scope 
of Civil Lists and Privy Purses. Here again I am denied 
the satisfaction of seeing final decisions reached during 
the period of my Viceroyalty. I deeply regret that that 
should be the case. For the issue is one of prime importance. And it is one in which dose and critical interest is taken not only in India, but far outside the borders or 
this country. I do therefore sincerely trust that in regard 
to it an early solution, and one that may command general 
commendation not only in this country but outside, may 
be forthcoming. The recent discussions between representative Princes and my advisers have been of real 
value, and I confidently hope that they will shortly yield 
those solid and generally acceptable results to which I 
have just referred. 

I would like to take this occasion to say how much 
as Crown Representative I value the advice and the frank 
expression of the views of representative Princes in 
matters such as this. For the decisions that have to be 
taken by the Crown Representative are often grave ones, 
and he will, I am sure, at all times be anxious to be 
assured, before he reaches a conclusion that he is fully 
cognisant of the views of the Princely Order on matters 
so directly concerning members of that Order, and of the 
considerations that weigh with them. 

Your Highnesses will realise, as I do, that the problems that face you today are far from simple, and that 
there lies ahead a period in which problems more difficult still may have to be confronted. If the best interests of the states, the best interests of India, are to be safeguarded, 
we must be at pains to face the facts and be willing, even 
at the cost of sacrifice, to make such adjustments as the 
turn of world events makes necessary. I know from my 
own extensive journeyings among the States to what an 
extent certain Indian States have become an example and 
an inspiration to other parts of India. It must be our 
object to ensure that that shall be the case in every area. 
And, indeed, it is essential in the interests of the States
and in the interests of their survival that they should not 
fall below modern standards of administration in any way. 
I need not assure Your Highnesses as I talk of those 
difficult and delicate matters that to the extent that I, or my 
representatives on instructions, have had to take 
a particular line in regard to co-operative measures and the like, I have been concerned solely — and it is the true and legitimate function in this sphere of the Crown 
Representative — to awaken the indifferent to consciousness 
of the dangers that threaten them ; to point out deficiencies : to suggest remedies ; to co-ordinate individual initiatives for the benefit of all. But you may be certain 
that at all times the underlying consideration that has 
governed any decisions that I have had to take, and that 
will, I am sure, govern such decisions as may fall to be 
taken by my successors, is that the Indian States shall fit 
themselves to play that great and positive part in the 
development of India as a whole which their importance 
and their history justifies ; and that it is to the interest 
of the Princely Order that such weaknesses as may today 
exist, whether in administration or organisation, shall be 
eliminated with the minimum of delay. 

I would not like to conclude my observations today 
without again thanking Your Highnesses and the Princely 
Order for the invaluable help that you have given to the 
war effort, and without thanking you, too, for the help that 
I have had in the efforts I have made while I have been 
Viceroy to further the modernization of administration in 
the States, and for the help you have given me on so very 
many critical issues directly affecting the well-being and 
the future of your States. These are testing times — all of 
us realise that. But Your Highnesses represent great and 
distinguished traditions and the Indian States do as a whole 
represent a great potentiality for good in the times that lie 
before us. On the eve therefore of my laying down the 
great office which I have had the honour to hold I appeal 
to Your Highnesses here today, and through you to the 
Princely Order and to all who exercise authority and 
influence in the Indian States, to see to it that the splendid 
opportunity lying before the Rulers of those States is not 
missed and to ensure that advantage is taken of it with 
such vigour and foresight, with such judicious blending 
of old and new, with such subordination of narrow personal and local interests, to true patriotism that the future of India — of the Indian States in close collaboration with 
British India — may be ensured, and that future generations 
may remember with gratitude the part played by the 
leaders of Princely India in securing the stability of that 
common and glorious inheritance. 

When next this Chamber meets it will be under the 
Chairmanship of the great soldier and distinguished administrator who is now about to succeed me as Viceroy. Lord Wavell's wide range of knowledge and experience, the 
interest that he has always taken in the Indian States, are 
well-known to Your Highnesses ; and in the difficulties 
and the problems that have to be faced by the Indian 
States, I know that in him the States will have a wise, 
sagacious, and sympathetic friend. And now before I 
close my address let me thank you all once again, and that 
most warmly and sincerely, for all the help and the constant 
and generous support that you have given to me in the 7 1/2
years during which I have had the honour to preside over 
the deliberations of Your Highnesses, and to represent the 
Crown in its dealings with the Indian States and the 
Princely Order. 