
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Elgin
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 22 January 1894
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,— I am deeply obliged to 
you for your courtesy in waiting upon me, for the kind 
expressions you have used in the address which has just been 
read, and for your reference to my father’s memory. There 
can be no doubt that the present is a time especially trying 
to mercantile men in this, as in other quarters of the globe, 
and I can well understand your anxiety to place before me 
your views upon the problems that seem so urgent. I am all 
the more grateful to you for recognising the fact that for me 
to offer an opinion on the financial position, which was not 
arrived at "with extreme care and the keenest scrutiny” 
would be to forfeit any claim which you are good enough to 
say that I have to your good-will. In like manner, on questions of the extension of railways and telegraphic facilities, it is obvious that I cannot enter into details, but I must 
await the information which will no doubt accompany my 
assumption of the office I am now only approaching. But I 
think I am entitled, without presumption, to say that my 
experience at home has not only taught me the value of 
these facilities, but I know something of the methods by 
which they become available. Nothing could be more satisfactory to me than to hear you speak, as you have done, of the cordial co-operation of the Government and the representatives of the commercial community. You do me no more than justice in assuming that I shall do all I can to secure its continuance, and I can assure you that any representation from you, as representing the important interests of Bombay, will have my most careful consideration. 

I should like to take this opportunity of saying how much 
we were impressed by our reception on Saturday. The 
beauty of your city and its surroundings, and the cordiality of its people, we shall never forget. 