
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE SIMLA MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE
Speaker: Lord Irwin
Audience: Simla Municipal Committee
Date: 27 April 1926
Location: Shimla
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen, — On behalf of Lady Irwin and myself I 
thank you warmly for your address of welcome. In the 
ordinary course of events many months of my period of 
office in India will necessarily be spent within the 
limits of your Municipality and among the Residents of 
Simla whom you represent. It is for this reason a special 
gratification to receive within a few days of my arrival In 
Simla this expression of your kindly feelings towards us. 

I value your good wishes for my Viceroyalty, and 
the assurance which they convey that in my endeavours 
to promote the progress and prosperity of the people of 
India I may count upon the understanding sympathy of 
responsible bodies, such as your Committee. 

I appreciate very warmly your reference to my 
grandfather’s work for India. This is not an occasion, 
even if I wished to do so, to try the auguries, and from 
these omens to enter into the dangerous paths of prophecy. But the measure of generous recognition which 
history has assigned to the work which he sought to do 
will be a constant encouragement to me as I meet many 
critical questions calling for decision during my term of 
office. 

I may incidentally observe that my grandfather has 
some connection with our meeting to-day. For it was 
he who accepted the proposal pressed with vigour by 
Sir John Lawrence that the Governor-General and his 
Council should leave Calcutta in the summer months. 
It was Sir John Lawrence who later wrote, referring to 
Simla “ This place of all Hill Stations seems to me the 
best for the Supreme Government ".

It may fall to the lot of other Municipal Committees 
to guide the administration of cities with larger populations than Simla, and to provide for the diverse needs of commerce and industry which are not to be found in 
the Summer Metropolis of India. Yet, though your 
responsibilities in such directions may not be so wide as those of other Municipal Committees to which I have referred, they must surely in some aspects be quite 
unique in character and in complexity. The maximum 
population to be served in Simla in no season attains an 
excessive totaL Nevertheless the difficulties of the natural 
configuration of the mountain fastnesses in which your 
work lies, extend the sphere of your activities over a 
formidable mileage, and must present problems for the 
Municipal services and inspection staff, which are un- 
dreamt of in the philosophy of Municipalities upon more 
even surfaces. No other Municipality in India, moreover, has to provide at the same time for the needs of the summer headquarters of both a Central Government and 
a Provincial Government, with their large migratory 
establishments. And, if these difficulties were not enough, 
you have super-added to them the influx of population 
which follows upon the sessions of two Chambers of the 
Central Legislature and, in addition, occasional meetings 
of a Provincial Council. Thus, while you may not have 
the problems of a large poor population or of congested 
industrial settlements to deal with, you have to cater for 
a highly developed and no doubt at times critical body of 
residents with a wide range of needs and exacting standards 
of requirements. The migrations of Governments and the 
consequent ebb and flow of the population can hardly 
fail to add in a special degree to the complexity of your 
Municipal administration, the adjustment of your expenditure and the management of sources of revenue; 
and when you come before me, as you do to-day, grateful 
for assistance previously given but without any further 
request for special subventions, I recognise the wise forethought and devotion to Municipal interests which must have characterised your administration in the past, and 
felicitate you on your public spirit, independence, and 
self-reliance. I congratulate you also on the success with 
which you have carried through the vital question of the 
new water-supply. I shall take an early opportunity to 
make myself familiar with your local institutions. You 
may count on my sympathy and interest in all that you 
project for the improvement of the amenities of Simla. 

Lady Irwin eagerly looks forward to taking an active 
part in the work of both local and all-India Associations 
for the relief of suffering and the improvement of social 
conditions. The field of work in India is so wide that it 
must be with some misgivings that she approaches the 
task ; but she relies with confidence upon the support 
and assistance of keen and sympathetic fellow-workers 
among all classes of the community, and hopes that their 
joint efforts in this field may be rewarded by sonic addition 
to the total of human happiness in India. 

Gentlemen, I thank you once more for your address 
and am glad to have made your acquaintance, which I 
hope during these next years my residence in Simla will 
give me the opportunity to extend. 