
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Reading
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 1 April 1926
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Gentlemen. — I am glad on the occasion of my approaching 
departure from India to have this opportunity of meeting once 
again the members of the Bombay Chamber of Commerce ; 
and I am very grateful to your Chamber and to you, gentlemen, 
personally for your kind thought in presenting me with this 
farewell address and for your good wishes for me and Her 
Excellency. 

You have been kind enough to enumerate, in very generous 
terms of appreciation, some of the events during my period of 
office which have had reactions on trade and commerce. 
Many years of my life before I assumed charge of my office in 
India had been passed in close touch with those associated 
in these pursuits in the metropolis of the Empire ; and I could 
claim also to have had some first-hand acquaintance with other 
great centres of commerce and finance in other countries both 
in the old world and the new. 

I came to India fresh from the momentous discussions on 
economic and financial reconstruction in Europe which were 
occupying the minds of all thinking men at home. The 
normal production and interchange of goods and raw material 
had in some countries practically come to a standstill. Markets 
were everywhere dull. Exchange was undergoing violent 
fluctuations. The currency systems of some countries had 
failed to withstand the shock, to which they had been 
subjected, and were falling down in value to vanishing point. 
The more pessimistic were inclined to predict that the world 
would not recover for a century from this economic dislocation. 
The more hopeful recognised that the greatest care, industry 
and forethought would be required to build up again the stability 
of pre-war conditions. With my mind attuned to these problems, I set myself on arrival in India to try to restore stability to the finances of the Government of the country by rigid 
economy and prudence, to rehabilitate the railway systems and 
to reconstruct those aspects of conditions connected with 
industry, trade and commerce in which the Government can 
properly lend a helping hand. 

My Government in their efforts have had the assistance of 
favourable monsoon seasons ; they have also had, as I most 
gratefully acknowledge, the firm support of the commercial 
community in overcoming their difficulties. Though conditions 
in commercial circles in the earlier part of the period of my 
Viceroyalty were often depressing and sometimes almost 
desperate, there has been a complete absence of panic ; and 
the commercial community have put their trust in the sincerity 
of the efforts of Government to find a solution to the problems 
confronting the country. They have assisted Government 
throughout to the best of their ability with reasonable 
criticism and advice. Their technical knowledge and 
experience have been freely put at our disposal ; and their 
own energy, initiative and courage have supplemented in a 
remarkable degree the measures adopted by Government for the 
amelioration of the situation. 

Now we are in calmer waters ; and I think that both the 
Government and the commercial community can look back with 
satisfaction over the great distance, traversed in so short a 
time, and now separating us from the cyclone which once 
threatened to engulf the commercial and financial well-being 
of India. 

My only regret is that the limitations of financial stringency 
and the vital necessity for reconstruction and rehabilitation 
have militated against any widespread and general progress 
with very important schemes of new construction and development. The former work was more vital and had to take precedence, as any prudent businessman will admit. With 
the more stable condition now secured, the era for these 3 new 
schemes has, I hope, begun. I know that all well-considered 
new projects will have the warm support of the commercial 
community. In the Roya] Commission on Agriculture I leave 
behind a new field of enquiry, in which I am proud to have 
helped to turn the first furrows and which, I am confident, has 
potentialities for a rich harvest of future prosperity. 

Bombay still has some problems to solve, and watches for 
a change in the moons of commercial activity to bring better 
trade weather. I believe the new moon is now not far off ; 
and when the change begins, I am confident that the enterprise 
of Bombay will take the fullest advantage of opportunities. 

Gentlemen, I thank you again for your address. Though 
time and space may separate me in future from the important 
interests you represent here, I shall continue to watch with 
sympathy and confidence the future development of the great 
commercial mart and Empire port of Bombay. 

