
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Chelmsford
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 4 April 1916
Location: Mumbai
Notes: In the book, prior to the speech, there is information about who all were present for it. This is also a reply address and the address being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences:  Assembled dignitaries

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen , — Let me first thank you 
for the personal note of welcome contained in your address. 
India above all countries is not likely to belittle the value 
of hereditary association, and though the period during 
which my grandfather and father were connected with the old 
Bombay Army is beyond my memory, still it is something 
that the link is there, and I value it as a stimulus and an 
inspiration. 

You allude to my sixteen months’ sojourn in India as a 
Territorial officer ; I am grateful for the experience so derived. 
In the first place, I was enabled to see with my own eyes the 
steadfast loyalty of the Princes, Chiefs, and peoples of India to 
His Majesty the King-Emperor. India has no need to be 
reminded of His Majesty’s keen and lively solicitude on her 
behalf. In the second place, I was privileged to watch the 
work and win the friendship of His Excellency Lord Hardinge, 
who lays down his office to-day. Lord Hardinge has won to 
an unprecedented degree the confidence, the respect, nay, I 
would say the affection of the peoples of India, and he has 
set a hard task before his successor. Continuity is however, 
in my opinion, a cardinal principle of policy when one man 
succeeds another, and so far as possible I shall deem it my 
duty and privilege to carry on Lord Hardinge’s work where 
he has left it. 

You refer in your address to my municipal experience. 
I must confess that municipal work, especially in the educational sphere, is my first love. It has to my mind the pre-eminent merit of being removed to a large extent from the 
ordinary divisions of party politics, and men differ only, or 
should differ only, according to their respective views of the 
expediency of a particular piece of concrete work. Those who 
engage in it for the most part, — and I speak from my experience of my late colleagues on the London County Council, — look for no reward beyond that of satisfaction in good work 
well done on behalf of the community. 

Following your example, I shall not refer to your local 
needs : it is neither the occasion nor the time. But I am not 
unaware of the splendid work which has been done in Bombay 
in respect of the transport of troops and of your care in the 
hospital for such of those troops as return invalided or wound- 
ed from the stricken field. 

Lady Chelmsford would wish me to thank you for the 
welcome accorded to her in your address. Those of us who 
have had previous experience as Governors General or Governors know the debt we owe to our wives and how that, come what may, there is one at our side who can sustain us when 
we flag, and inspire us with fresh courage when we are down-hearted. 

I cannot end my reply without an acknowledgment of 
that passage in your address which refers to the war. I return 
here from England, where I found all men determined that 
there should be only one ending to this war, namely, a victory 
for the Allied arms. Your address assures me of the same 
invincible determination. No personal losses, no reverses will 
quench this spirit. We are all of one mind in this, that 
peace can only come when we have secured the safety, honour, 
and welfare of our Sovereign and his Dominions.
