
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Willingdon
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 18 April 1931
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 



Mr. President and Members of the Bombay Chamber 
of Commerce. 

It is a very real pleasure to Lady Willingdon and 
myself to receive this cordial welcome from you gentlemen who hold such an important position in the affairs of this great city and to thank you for your congratulations 
on my appointment to the responsible post of Viceroy of 
India by our beloved Sovereign, the King Emperor. 

I am delighted too to feel that you greet me today 
not as a stranger but as an old friend, and that you still 
have the keenest recollection of the unflagging energy, 
enthusiasm and organizing ability of my wife. Let me 
assure you that she still posseses these qualities just as 
fully developed as when last she lived in your midst in 
Bombay. 

It is, therefore, with a very full heart that we find 
ourselves once more in a land which holds for us such 
unforgettable associations and memories, so many tried 
and trusted friends, and you can well imagine our feelings 
when we beheld once more this morning, in all their old 
beauty, the harbour and city of Bombay. It is good 
indeed to be back amongst you, and I thank you, 
gentlemen, most gratefully for the kind terms in which 
you have bidden us welcome. 

Believe me, I am fully alive to the great responsibilities which will rest upon me at this juncture. For 
the last few years and the years immediately before us 
will, I venture to think, take their place in Indian history 
as among the most momentous that this country has ever 
known, and the task of those whose duty it will be to 
guide and further the great constructive work that lies 
ahead is indeed one which will demand steady heads and 
stout hearts, a full measure of faith and of courage in us 
all. Above all things, for the successful completion of 
that work, there will be need of mutual understanding 
and good-will, and my most earnest prayer as I set foot 
in India is for that harmony of spirit between countries 
and races, creeds and communities, on which alone a 
strong, peaceful and united India can securely rest. 

To attain this great purpose, much has been accomplished 
in recent months. The Conference in London gave fresh 
reality and vigour to those old ties of mutual friendship 
and confidence which have so long bound our two 
countries together. More recent events have so turned 
out, to the deep gratification of all who love India, that 
we can confidently hope that in the further stages of 
constitutional reconstruction all parties and interests will 
jointly play their part. There are none, I know, who 
will not agree with me when I say that for the creation 
of this happier spirit India owes an immense debt to His 
Excellency Lord Irwin, from whom I shall shortly take 
over the duties of my high office. Today when he passes 
through the Gateway of India, this country will indeed 
have bidden farewell to one who, I would venture to say, 
has secured the admiration and affection of every class 
and of every community. He will not be forgotten, nor 
will he forget, and we may be certain that, wherever he 
may be, he will always be ready to give of his best in the 
cause of India which he has served for the last five years 
with such great distinction, zeal and devotion. 

You have mentioned certain matters with which you, 
as representatives of great commercial interests, are more 
particularly and intimately concerned. You would not, 
I am sure, expect me to deal with them in any detail 
before I have had full time for study, but I assure you 
that I will give close attention to these or any other such 
matters which you may at any time wish to bring before 
me. 


I was much interested to hear your encouraging 
opinions as to the results of the Round Table Conference 
held recently in London, which has laid down the framework for a new constitution for the whole of India, and to learn that I can rely on you to encourage the legitimate 
aspirations of the Indian people to govern their own
country. It is true too that you have expressed some 
anxieties that are in your minds with regard to the future 
of British Commerce in India. Let me say at once that 
in the matter of trade and commerce as in all other 
matters I stand for the principle of fairplay and equal 
opportunity and may I remind you that the Round Table 
Conference in full Committee accepted the principle that 
there should be no discrimination between the rights of 
the British mercantile firms and companies trading in 
India and the rights of Indian born subjects. The best 
means of arranging for its application is a matter for 
further discussion : but the principle itself is beyond 
question. I cannot conceive that anyone who takes an 
enlightened view of the best interests of the country will 
think otherwise, and I trust that a fuller understanding 
of what is involved will clear away all doubts and 
hesitations. 

While I entirely share your regret that it should 
have been found necessary to place greater burdens of 
taxation upon commerce and industry at a very difficult 
period, I recognise, as I am sure you also recognise, 
that it was vitally important that India should 
produce before the world a balanced budget at the 
present juncture. So far as her financial difficulties are due to local and domestic reasons, we may now 
hope that these reasons are in course of removal ; but I 
am afraid that any really substantial revival must await 
an improvement in the general conditions of trade and 
commerce throughout the world. You may rest assured, 
however, that the burden of taxation will be lightened as 
soon as legitimate means of lightening it can be devised, 
and that I shall give my earnest attention to the important 
question of reduction of Government expenditure wherever 
possible. 

The development of civil aviation is a subject in 
which I take a keen and active interest, particularly as 
I have, for the past four years lived in the Dominion of 
Canada where there is an active public interest being 
taken in the question of linking up all parts of that 
country through a co-operative system of aerial communication. I do not propose to refer to the various points you have raised in this connection but assure you that 
they shall receive my active personal attention with a 
view to the promotion of this most necessary form of 
transport in the best interests of the country as a whole. 

As regards your remarks on the subject of the action 
of the Government of Bombay in applying for the 
appropriation of their share of the petrol tax for ordinary 
road maintenance and repairs, the position, as I understand it, is that the Government of Bombay have applied to the Government of India for permission to do this for 
one year as a purely temporary expedient to meet the 
severe and peculiar financial difficulties which have come 
upon them this year. I am informed that the matter is 
still under discussion and that no decision has been 
taken, but that there is no intention whatever on the part 
of the Government of Bombay to ask for a permanent 
diversion of this fund from the construction of new 
roads to the maintenance of the present road system. 

Before I conclude, I would like to thank you for 
your kind reference to Lady Willingdon. She comes to 
India with a memory no less keen than mine of happy 
years in Bombay and Madras and with a resolve, no less 
fixed than mine, to do, under Providence, all that lies in 
her power for the good of India and her people, and to 
carry on the great work done by Her Excellency Lady 
Irwin in the many fields of her activities. 

For myself, I would only say that I fervently trust 
that, when the time comes for me to lay down the office 
which I am about to assume, the ship of State, which it 
will have been my privilege to guide, will have emerged 
from the rough waters, which, as history shows, can 
seldom be avoided at a time of constitutional development, 
and will be sailing upon smoother seas. To attain this 
end, based as it must be on the happiness and well-being 
of the people of India, in contented partnership with the 
people of England, I shall count no efforts too great and 
no work too arduous. I am confident that I can rely on 
your help and co-operation in this task, and am encouraged 
and strengthened by the warmth of the welcome which 
you have extended to us today.