
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE DELHI MUNICIPALITY
Speaker: Lord Curzon
Audience: Delhi Municipal Corporation
Date: 13 November 1905
Location: Agra
Notes: This is a reply address. The speed being replied to is given in the book. Originally this speech would have been in Delhi, but Curzon was ill so a deputation met him in Agra instead.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen,— I am exceedingly sorry that I was not able 
to receive you at Delhi itself, where I had looked forward 
to spending three happy days, when my recent illness came 
on, and where there was some important work that I 
desired to complete. It is very good of you to have travelled 
down here to present me with your address in person, and 
I gratefully accept it at your hands. 

When I paid my first official visit to Delhi as Viceroy six 
years ago I remember congratulating the members of the 
Delhi Municipality upon the model character of the address 
which they did me the honour of presenting. Then my work in India lay before me, and both the Municipality and I could only speak in the future tense. Now it is finished ; 
and I cannot but feel a sense of pride that, from the 
representatives of that ancient city, the capital of Empire, 
and the possessor of an undying renown, I should have been 
thought worthy of such a tribute as that which you have 
just rendered. 

Your remarks have related principally to archaeology, 
and to the many occasions on which I have been drawn to 
Delhi during the past six years in connection with antiquarian or other work. You are right in saying that I have taken a great interest in the place because of its imperial 
traditions and the beauty of its remains. You have particularly alluded to the restorations and repairs that have been undertaken in the shrines and tombs outside the city, 
principally those of Humayun, Safdar Jung, Isa Khan, and 
Nizam-ud-Din. I like to think that these famous men of 
the past still have their last resting places properly tended, 
and further that buildings so noble and surroundings so 
gracious and fair are not allowed to fall into decay by the 
apathy or slovenliness of later generations. In the Fort a 
great deal more remains to be done. A considerable 
portion of the garrison is to be moved outside the city ; and 
I hope we shall thus gradually get rid of those monstrous 
barracks which are now such an eyesore and offence. 
We are at present engaged in restoring the Palace-gardens 
of the Moghul Emperors, of which the pavilions and water-courses still exist, or can be reproduced. I have, as you know, brought out a Florentine artificer in mosaics to 
replace the marble incrustations at the back of the Throne, 
and I hope that a few years hence the interior of the Fort 
may present some slight resemblance — it cannot, I fear, be 
more, for so much has perished irretrievably — to what it 
was, not in the later days of the Moghuls, when the 
moribund condition of the Empire was typified in the 
squalor and decay of the Court, but in the resplendent 
times of Shah Jehan and Aurangzeb. When the interior of 
the Fort has been renovated, I have always hoped that the 
artificial glacis outside, which was thrown up for defensive 
purposes after the Mutiny, may be removed, and that the 
magnificent red walls may then be seen to their base as they were up till 50 years ago. 

You have alluded to the great pageant of the Coronation 
Durbar that was held at Delhi nearly three years ago. We 
are now engaged in commemorating, with the assistance of 
Sir Aston Webb, one of the foremost of English architects, 
the common site of the two Durbars of 1877 and 1903, and 
when these works, which will combine architectural features 
with landscape gardening, have been completed, Delhi will 
possess a twentieth century monument that will, I hope, compare favourably in beauty and impressiveness with the relics of earlier ages. I often see in unfriendly papers and speeches 
a repetition of the old calumny that our Durbar in 1903 
was a costly extravagance. The people who said it was 
going to cost 2 crores became so enamoured of the phrase 
that they have gone on ever since declaring that it did cost 2 crores, and one would almost imagine that some of them believe it, although the actual figures require to be multiplied no fewer than seven times in order to sustain the illusion. You, who are on the spot, are cognizant of the 
facts ; and the view which you entertain is that which will 
permanently commend itself to the judgment of history, 
namely, that the Durbar was a just and befitting celebration 
of the great event which it was intended to commemorate. 

I will not now allude to the generous terms in which you 
have spoken of the general character of my administration, 
but will merely thank you for the unsolicited compliment. 
You have concluded by expressing both a hope and a conviction that my affection for India will some time bring me out again. Who knows but what it may? Perhaps as 
a simple tourist I may one day wander in a ticca gharry 
among the buildings and monuments that I loved, and to 
which while responsible for them I endeavoured to devote 
so true and reverent a care. However that may be, I can 
never forget my seven happy visits to Delhi as Viceroy, or 
the courtesy and consideration which I have on so many 
occasions received from its inhabitants. 