
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Willingdon
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 17 April 1936
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen,— I appreciate very deeply the generous 
language you have used in your address and now that the 
time has come for me to say farewell to you I confess that 
I hardly know what words to use with which to express 
my feelings. In this case, however, the simplest phrases 
are the best and I would ask you to accept my warmest 
thanks for your kind appreciation of my services. 

It is clear that you wish to send me away from India 
happy in the knowledge that my term of office has met 
with the approval of the Bombay Chamber of Commerce 
and in this you have succeeded to the full. I have always 
realized the close connection between the contentment of 
a country and the prosperity of her trade and commerce, 
and the harmonious atmosphere now prevailing, to which 
you, Sir, referred in your address, is, I think I can claim, 
not one of the smallest factors in the improvement of trade 
conditions today as compared with when I took over office 
five years ago, and even though that improvement may 
only at present be discerned as a small gleam of light in 
the economic sky, I am convinced that that gleam is 
steadily gaining in strength from day to day. India’s 
credit stands high, and of that fact I am proud for 
although there are contributing reasons for it, one very 
large element has been the restoration of law and order 
throughout the country which has been the constant 
pre-occupation of my Government and myself during my 
entire regime. 

I was particularly pleased to hear your expression of 
thanks to the Members of my Government for the courtesy 
and consideration which they have shown to the representatives of your Chamber when you have had occasion 
to address Government in matters of public or commercial 
interest, and I would express my full confidence that that 
courtesy and consideration which you have received in 
the past will continue to be extended to you in equal 
measure in the future. 

I am indeed glad to think that financial conditions 
have so improved as to permit of the initiation of a 
campaign for the amelioration of the condition of the 
agricultural masses and I have not the slightest doubt 
that my successor will continue the good work that has 
been started and it is to be hoped that improving conditions will result in greater resources being placed at his disposal for the purpose. 

Your tribute to the manifold activities of Her 
Excellency has touched mo deeply. She has taken the 
keenest interest in the welfare of the women and children 
of this country, and she will, I know, sincerely value your 
kindly references to her untiring efforts. 

The time has now come to say Good-Bye— and I do 
so with a heavy heart for the links that, have so long and 
so closely bound me to India for many long years have now 
to be broken, but I trust, Gentlemen, that you will not 
forget me and in bidding you farewell I wish you all a 
bright and prosperous future.