
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE INDIAN MERCHANTS' CHAMBER AND BUREAU
Speaker: Lord Hardinge
Audience: Indian Merchants' Chamber and Bureau
Date: 18 November 1910
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address and the address being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences: 

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Indian 
Merchants’ Chamber and Bureau,— The very kindly 
references you have made to my grandfather’s career 
cannot but strike gratefully upon my ear; but when he 
set his hand to the work that lay before him he can have 
hardly foreseen the immense development that the next 
60 years held in store: and if he was actuated by sentiments similar to those with which I have followed his footsteps to India, he would have been particularly gratified to know of the birth and rapid growth of indigenous enterprise. 

It is sometimes alleged that the people of this country 
look too much to Government and too little to themselves 
for the initiation of improvements and the development 
of resources, but the figures you have quoted show that 
this is hardly accurate in the region of commercial enterprise, except in so far as the peace and security afforded by a stable Government have made it possible. 

Government should clearly do what it can to foster 
indigenous progress, but I am glad to hear that you 
recognize that economic regeneration must largely come 
from within, and that Government can do little to help 
those who are not ready to help themselves. 

I gather from another address which I have received 
to-day that Government have recently announced a more 
liberal policy for the extension of feeder railway lines by 
private enterprise, and I trust that the creation of 
a new portfolio for education may, among other advantages, lead to progress in technical education of all 
kinds.

I do not feel competent to express opinions upon the 
various items of the extensive programme you have laid 
before me until I have had time to learn something of 
India, to study the questions involved, and to consult my 
colleagues; but I feel confident that I should have their 
hearty concurrence and support in saying that the Government of India have done and will do all that in them lies to secure an alleviation of the disabilities under which your fellow-countrymen and our fellow-subjects labour in some of the Colonies. 

I feel that I have been fortunate in the moment of 
my arrival upon your shores. The season is prosperous, 
political asperities are somewhat abated, and all sane 
men are united in deploring revolutionary crime. No 
man can foretell the future, but the auguries are propitious, and if India will extend to me the same kindly feelings which I have for her, I shall go forward on my 
way in hope and confidence. 

Let me, in conclusion, thank you heartily, Mr. 
President and Gentlemen, for the cordial welcome which 
you have extended to me, and for your good wishes to 
Lady Hardinge and myself. 