
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S PRONOUNCEMENT TO THE GWALIOR GUARANTEED THAKURS AT DELHI
Speaker: Lord Chelmsford
Audience: Gwalior Thakurs
Date: 14 March 1921
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Jagirdars and Tankadars of the Gwalior State, — It must be 
within the knowledge of most of you how your ancestors 
came to have direct access to the Political Officers and thus 
to enjoy the protection of the British Government. 

2. In the beginning of the 19th Century the peace of 
Hindustan was very much disturbed by the prevalence of the 
predatory system. The British Government desired to restore 
order and succeeded in doing so by 1818 A. D. To this result 
the co-operation of their Ally, Maharaja Daulat Rao Scindia, 
greatly contributed. 

3. The overthrow of those who were given to marauding and 
levying blackmail, left the chieftains and nobility of Malwa 
without means of subsistence and in consequence extremely 
sore and disaffected. The British Government, therefore, 
addressed themselves to the task of pacifying the country and 
appointed Sir John Malcolm to effect this end. Sir John 
accomplished his mission with the help of certain assistants 
and the ready co-operation of the Durbars of Central India. 

4. Settlements were thus effected which, by the fact of the 
mediation of Sir John Malcolm and his assistants, involved the 
guarantee on the part of the British Government that whatever was settled would be scrupulously observed. These settlements assured to the Thakurs the continuance, in 
perpetuity or for life-time, according as the terms of the grants 
provided, of their holdings and tankas subject to good conduct 
and in many cases the duties of watch and ward in respect of 
portions of the Durbar territory in proximity to their grants. 
But the British Government did not intend that the mediation 
of Sir John Malcolm should form the basis for encroachment 
upon, or interference with, the suzerain rights of the Durbars. 
In the course of time, however, owing to the conditions prevailing in most States, the settlements effected created a privileged position for those to whom certain emoluments had been 
secured and British officers were led to intervene in matters 
with which Sir John Malcolm’s mediation had no concern. 

5. The conditions referred to have ceased to exist, and in 
Gwalior the Durbar’s administration is characterised by 
fairness and justice, and Lieutenant-General His Highness the 
Maharaja Scindia takes an active personal interest in all 
branches of administration. And indeed for safeguarding the 
interests of this large body of his Jagirdars he created, many 
years ago, a separate Department and framed a Manual which 
is complete in all respects. 

6. But quite apart from that, the need for a revision of the 
practice which has subsequently grown up has been apparent 
for a considerable time. The Government of India have given their best consideration to the problem and have arrived at the following conclusions : — 

(1) that, while the pledges originally given by the British Government must remain inviolable, the specially privileged position which the guarantee holders 
have acquired, and which was not contemplated 
at the time of the original settlement, should not 
continue ; and, therefore, 

(2) that the Gwalior Durbar should no longer be prevented from exercising the rights which belong to it as 
Suzerain. 

7. Consequently it has been arranged, in consultation with 
the Maharaja Scindia, that — 

(1) the Gwalior Durbar will issue to you fresh Sanads 
in perpetuity in a form approved by the Government of India ; 

(2) these Sanads will, in all cases, confirm the specific rights secured to you by the existing title-deeds and the specific obligations laid on you by your 
existing title-deeds will be enforced by His High- 
ness to a very limited extent ; 

(3) under His Highness’ Nazrana Rules, as recently modified, the succession dues, which were formerly 
levied on adoption at the rate of a whole year’s revenue, are now to be levied at the reduced rate of 
three months’ revenue only. 

8. In view of this settlement, Political Officers will no longer 
concern themselves with your affairs, and you will in future 
look to your Suzerain, His Highness the Maharaja Scindia 
for the time being, and his Durbar in all matters connected 
with your estates and tankas. You will, therefore, henceforth be entitled to the rights and subject to the obligations contained in the Manual of Jagirdars of the Gwalior State, 
Sambat 1970, as in force for the time being. 

Jagirdars and Tankadars, — Such are in brief the terms of 
the settlement which has been arrived at between my Government and the Gwalior Durbar on your behalf. These terms have been fully explained to you by my Agent, Colonel 
Beville, and I am glad to hear that you have accepted them as 
a fair and just settlement of your claims under the agreements 
guaranteed by the officers of the British Government a century 
ago. I feel that you have every reason to congratulate yourselves on this settlement, which is the result of the negotiations of my officers with His Highness the Maharaja Scindia. His 
Highness has met their suggestions in a most generous spirit, 
and will, I am confident, always be ready to treat you as his 
loyal feudatories, and extend to you a friendly hand in all 
your difficulties. I look to you on your part to bear true 
allegiance towards your Suzerain, and to perform faithfully 
the duties which you owe to him. By so doing you will 
ensure your own happiness and contentment, and add to the 
strength and prosperity of the British Empire, of which the 
Gwalior Durbar and yourselves are a part. 
