
Title: CONVOCATION OF THE BOMBAY UNIVERSITY
Speaker: Lord Ripon
Audience: Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, and students of Bombay University
Date: 1 December 1884
Location: Mumbai
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chancellor, Mr. Vice-Chancellor, and Gentlemen — 
I have seldom had a task in some respects more difficult than 
that which falls to my lot at the present moment. When I 
entered this hall, I knew that a distinction was about to be 
conferred upon me which I highly valued, because I saw in it 
a proof of the approval of a body which had devoted itself 
for many years to the advancement of the cause of education in India. But I was little prepared to find that I should have, if I may be pardoned the word, to encounter 
so appreciative a review of my public life as that which has fallen from my friend your Vice-Chancellor. (Cheers.) I only wish that I could think that his friendly judgment 
rightly described the course of that life, but I may perhaps 
be permitted to claim for it that there has at least been 
about it a certain unity. Throughout more than thirty 
years that I have taken part in public affairs in England, 
and now here, I have been actuated by the same general 
principles of policy, and I may say that I have adhered 
to them without wavering. I will not venture to occupy 
your time by following in any degree the observations 
which have been made upon the details of my public course, 
either at home or in India; but I will say this, that I esteem 
it an honour of the highest kind that a body such as this 
should have given such an unmistakeable intimation of 
their approval of the policy which I have pursued. (Cheers.) I should be the last man to take an unfair advantage of the signs of esteem which you have given me to-night, and 
to interpret them as meaning that all the members of 
this University approved of each individual measure of my 
Government. That of course is impossible ; but at least 
I hope that I may interpret this degree as an indication 
that this distinguished body has followed with its sanction and with its approval the educational policy of the Government of India since I have been connected with 
it. (Cheers.) You, Mr. Vice-Chancellor, have reminded 
me that a large portion of my public life has been given 
to the promotion of education in my own land — of education in the widest and the broadest sense, of education for the most enlightened and of education for the masses. 
And that same policy which I endeavoured to apply when 
I had the honour to be connected with the Department of 
Education at home I have pursued in India. (Cheers.) 
Gentlemen, it would have been indeed strange if I had 
not taken an interest in Indian education, for I have sat 
for many years at the feet of Lord Halifax, and I am proud 
to count him among my warmest friend — (cheers) — and to call him my honoured master. (Renewed cheers.) The principles of that great Despatch of 1854 were those which 
I sought to apply and develope when I came out to this 
country; but I knew that, however sound these principles 
might be, it would not be wise after a lapse of thirty years 
to take measures for practically applying them to the 
existing circumstances of India without first ascertaining 
exactly what those circumstances were, and what was the 
best means by which the principles of that despatch might 
be applied to them at the present time. I therefore thought 
it wise to institute a searching inquiry into the condition 
of education in India. That inquiry was conducted with 
great ability by those to whom it was entrusted, and it has 
resulted in the suggestion of measures which have been in 
the main adopted by the Government of India, and adopted 
I think I may say, with general acceptance. I found, gentlemen, even from the first moment that I accepted the office of Viceroy, that those who were interested in the 
progress of education in India were keenly desirous for its 
extension among the masses of the people. But the question 
of primary education in India is beset by many difficulties, 
the chief of which arise from the very common, perhaps, but very vital difficulty — want of funds. There were those who in their zeal for elementary schools would 
have been prepared to see secondary and higher education imperilled and its advance delayed, but the Government of India never yielded to views of that description — 
(cheers) — and they were always determined that, whatever measures they might take to spread primary education throughout the country, they would do nothing 
which could endanger the advance of higher instruction. 
(Cheers.) It is true that we made an appeal to private aid, 
and that appeal has already received many responses 
which are, I trust, only the first-fruits of that noble harvest 
which will be gathered hereafter by those who come after 
us. For my own part, gentlemen, I can truly say that the more I have studied this question in India itself, the more convinced I have become that it would be a very serious 
mistake to do anything which could interfere with the onward progress of higher culture — (cheers) — or which I could tend to place it beyond the reach of youths of limited means. The Resolution which has been recently issued by the Government of India, and which constitutes 
almost my last political act in this country, has been 
framed upon these lines, and inspired by this spirit. 
(Cheers.) But, gentlemen, I am very strongly impressed 
with the conviction that the spread of education, and especially of Western culture, carried on, as it is, under the auspices of this and the other Indian universities, 
imposes new and special duties upon the Government of 
this country. It seems to me, I must confess, that it is 
little short of folly that we should throw open to increasing 
numbers the rich stores of Western learning; that we 
should inspire them with European ideas, and bring them 
into the closest contact with English thought ; and that 
then we should, as it were, pay no heed to the growth of 
those aspirations which we have ourselves created, and 
the spread of those ambitions we have ourselves called forth. (Loud cheers.) To my mind one of the most 
important, if it be also one of the most difficult, problems 
of the Indian Government in these days is how to afford 
such satisfaction to those aspirations and to those ambitions as may render the men who are animated by them the hearty advocates and the loyal supporters of the 
British Government. (Cheers.) It is in such considerations as these that those who care to seek for it may find the explanation of much of the policy which I have pursued in this country. Gentlemen, at this late hour I will detain you no longer, except to assure you that the deep 
interest which I have felt, and ever shall feel, in the progress of education in India makes me esteem very highly indeed the honour which you have conferred upon me to-day. (Cheers.) My best wishes will ever accompany the onward progress of this University, which is doing 
in India for England work so noble, and binding together 
the two lands and their various races with cords more 
powerful than the strength of armies — (cheers) — and more 
enduring than the craft of statesmen. Gentlemen, I thank 
you heartily. (Loud cheers.) 
