
Title: REPLY TO FAREWELL ADDRESS OF THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
Speaker: Lord Dufferin
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 13 December 1888
Location: Mumbai
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen,— I am afraid I stand before you rather in the position of a defaulter. I have to confess to you that I have been quite unable to frame a written reply to your 
address. According to the conventional usage it is necessary that the answer to such a document should in some way re-echo the paragraphs of the address itself, but when 
I came to take my pen in hand, I found that you had referred to the various phases of my administration in so generous and so kind a spirit that it became utterly impossible for me to write a word that could in any sense satisfy myself. I therefore thought that the best thing I 
could do would be to throw myself on your indulgence and 
in a few brief words, coming directly from my heart, to tell 
you with all the earnestness of which my nature is capable 
how grateful I am for the terms in which you have spoken 
of me. 

I assure you that I have never received an address 
during the long period of my service— in the course of 
which I have received many addresses— which has given 
me greater pleasure; and if ever hereafter I shall be called 
upon to defend my acts as a Viceroy of India, I do not 
know what better defence I can proffer than by simply 
submitting the paragraphs which have just been read. 
They will remain in my family as a proof of the reward 
which any one who endeavours faithfully and honestly to 
do his duty meets with at the hands of his countrymen. 
The only further reference which I should make to anything you have written is to assure you that my Government and myself have always considered it a matter of the 
greatest importance that before embarking upon any considerable act affecting either commerce or the general commercial welfare of the community, we should take the 
utmost advantage of the experience and knowledge of 
business possessed by the leading commercial men of the 
various centres of the population in this country. 

Among the members of the Supreme Legislative Council 
there is none more able than the gentleman who sits there 
by the right of his commercial and financial experience, 
and I am sure it will not have escaped your observation 
that during the last session I ran some little risk and overstepped the usual practice by taking the advantage of a technical excuse to allow the budget to be discussed in the 
Legislative Council, when under ordinary circumstances we 
should have been precluded by the regulations of business 
from so doing. In my own personal opinion there would 
ensue the very greatest advantage could such a practice 
be continued. However, gentlemen, I will not enter further upon the topics which I am sorry to say are no longer within my jurisdiction. I will simply conclude by again 
thanking you for your great kindness, and by asking you 
to accept, in lieu of the written reply to which you are 
properly entitled, a souvenir of one whose last day in 
India will have been gladdened by the kind words you have 
said to him. 
