
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Dufferin
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 8 December 1884
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is described in the book. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, — No servant of the 
Crown could desire his arrival in India to be more auspiciously inaugurated than by the cordial words of welcome and encouragement you have addressed to me on behalf of 
the inhabitants of this prosperous and famous city ; and the impressive picture you have drawn of the opportunities, duties, and responsibilities attaching to the great office I 
am about to assume, is well calculated to afford me matter 
for serious and wholesome reflection. It has been your 
pleasure to extend similar courtesies to several of my predecessors when they stood — as I do now — on the threshold of their career in this country, unwitting of the good or 
evil fortune which might be in store for them. These illustrious persons have greatly differed from each other in their antecedents, their dispositions, their attainments, and 
their intellectual idiosyncrasies. But there is one quality 
which all of them have possessed in common — a deep rooted and unswerving determination to sacrifice ease, health, leisure, nay, as some of them have done, even life itself, at 
the welcome and spirit-stirring call of duty.(Hear, hear, 
and cheers.) It is this characteristic which has impressed 
the Government of India, from its foundation to the present 
day, with a loftiness of aim and intention, and an energy 
in execution, which I believe to be unparalleled in the 
history of the world. (Cheers.) Though not presuming to 
compare myself with the statesmen who have gone before 
me, in this last respect at least I trust to prove their equal, 
and to preserve unimpaired the noble traditions of devotion and self-effacement which have been established by their heroic examples, and by none more signally than by your present illustrious and eminent Viceroy. (Loud cheers.) Whatever criticisms may be justly passed on my 
future administration, it shall be in the power of no man to 
allege that either from fear or favour, or any personal consideration, I have turned aside from whatever course was most conducive to the happiness of the millions entrusted 
to my care (cheers), or to the dignity, honour, and safety 
of that mighty Empire with which this great dependency is 
indissolubly incorporated. (Renewed cheers.) Only partially acquainted as I am at present with the indigenous customs and ancient civilization of its multitudinous races, I hope to find at your provincial centres advisers and counsellors, both British and native, whose experience will enable me to discharge with success the task I have undertaken ; and to no set of men could I address myself with 
greater advantage for such information as I may require 
than to the representatives of the great community of 
Bombay, whose industry, enterprise, and sagacity have 
created a city vying in its prosperity and wealth with any 
capital that has ever been called into existence by Caliph 
or Mogul. Should fitting opportunities present themselves 
to my Government of still further promoting your welfare, 
stimulating your trade, increasing your security, or enlarging the scope of your municipal activity, you may rest assured that it will be my most anxious desire to take 
advantage of them. Under any circumstances I shall 
always retain a grateful recollection of the considerate 
manner in which you have made me feel that in landing 
upon the shores of India I have come to a home already 
rendered bright and attractive by the presence of hosts of 
fellow-workers, well-wishers, and friends. (Loud and prolonged cheers.) 
