
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY LORD WAVELL'S BROADCAST TO INDIA ON 21ST MARCH 1947 
Speaker: Lord Wavell
Audience: People of India
Date: 21 March 1947
Location: New Delhi
Notes: Broadcast means this was probably a radio speech
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

This is a short personal message to the people of India 
to say goodbye and farewell— God-be-with-you and fare- 
you-well, as those words mean. They come from my heart, 
for I owe much to India, where I have spent more than 
thirteen years of my life. As a child I played and grew for 
2 1/2 years in the Nilgiri hills, where the sun and air of a fine 
climate gave my body a good start in life. As a young 
subaltern I spent five years in northern India, and they 
were certainly some of tho best years of my life. They 
were devoted perhaps more to sport than to hard work or 
to hard thinking; but I learnt the elements of my profession of soldiering in a land which has always bred fine soldiers. In those years I came closest to knowledge of 
the common Indian people. I learnt enough of the 
language to speak with the villagers where I camped und 
shot, with my shikaris in the hills of Kashmir, where I was 
several times alone with them for many weeks, and with 
the soldiers of India with whom I served. Mv first 
independent command on active service was a detachment of 33 Indian soldiers; a V.C.O., 8 Sikhs, 8 Punjabi Mussulmans, 8 Dogras, and 8 Pathans—all magnificent 
men. I also acted as Transport Officer to an Indian 
Mountain Battery for several weeks march; and a friend 
in the Royal Engineers used to allow me to come out sometimes with his Company of Madras Sappers and Miners. So that I left. India with some knowledge of and a great 
affection for the Indian soldier and the Indian peasant. 

During the two world wars it was my fortune to see 
much of the prowess of the Indian soldier, and to profit 

My last service in India has been the longest, 2 years 
as Commander-in-Chief and nearly 3 1/2 years as Viceroy. 
They have been years of hard work and heavy responsibility. I shall be glad if I have during them done anything to repay to India my debt for the five years I enjoyed 
as a young man, and for the skill and gallantry of the 
Indian Army, which served under me through a number 
of campaigns, in success or failure, in good times or bad, 
but always with the valour and endurance of true 
warriors. 

I am conscious of mistakes I have made in these years, 
but I hope you will know that I have always tried to work 
for the welfare of India's inhabitants and for the advancement of India to self-rule. 

I am a soldier and my first words of farewell must be 
to the soldiers of India, in admiration and in gratitude. I 
believe that the stability of the Indian Army may perhaps 
be a deciding factor in the future of India. It has shown 
how all communities may work together to meet a common 
danger with comradeship and self-devotion. 

To all those with whom I have worked in these last 
years, within the Government or without— Rulers of States, 
Ministers, Officials and Non-Officials— I give deep-felt 
thanks for their kindness, friendship and support. I would 
say a special word of gratitude and encouragement to the 
members of the Services, at the Centre and in the 
Provinces. I know and sympathise with their difficulties 
in these times of stress, I know to what strain they have 
been subjected and I know with what courage and hard 
work they have met them. They have been very devoted 
servants of India. 

My successor is known to many of you personally and 
to all by reputation as a great leader in war and an ardent 
supporter of progress. I can assure you of his goodwill 
towards India and of his vigour in showing it. 

You have hard, dangerous and difficult years ahead. 
But you will overcome them. I have always believed 
steadfastly in the future of India. I thank you and wish 
you good fortune. Good-bye, and may the world go well 
with you. 


