
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Minto
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 25 November 1910
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. The book has a description of the contents of the address being replied to.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 



Gentlemen, - I am at a loss to find words in which to 
thank you for all you have said to me, for I cannot but 
feel that your address and the magnificent reception to 
which you have invited me are not merely courtesies 
offered to a retiring Viceroy but are a spontaneous 
expression by the citizens of Bombay of their appreciation 
of the measures enacted during my administration, the 
good results of which they gladly recognise. I can only 
tell you. Gentlemen, I am deeply touched by this generous 
evidence of approval. You have in your address sketched 
the political state of affairs when I assumed the responsibilities of my Viceroyalty, I believe that you have sketched them quite accurately, certainly in accordance 
with views which I have often expressed, which I need not 
repeat, and now on the day of my departure from your 
shores I could indeed look for no greater gratification than 
your cordial assurance that I have not worked in vain. In 
the introduction of any great constitutional reform there 
must of necessity be many difficulties to face, and even 
when they have been overcome the perfection of the new 
scheme of administration can certainly not at once be 
expected. But, Gentlemen, the struggle of the last few 
years has been for the recognition of great principles which 
have now been accepted, and we may wisely leave it to 
time and experience to decide upon the details of the 
machinery by which those principles can best be safeguarded and maintained. I welcome your recognition of 
the closer relations which have been established between 
the Government and the public, and of the benefits to be 
derived from the enlarged representation of interests and 
communities; and I would take this opportunity of expressing my thanks for the able assistance the Government of India has invariably received from the Bombay members 
of the Imperial Legislative Council, whose prolonged 
presence at Calcutta has, I know, frequently been the cause 
of grave inconvenience to them. I shall watch the session 
of future Councils with the earnest hope that they may 
increasingly contribute to the good government of India 
and the welfare of her people. I thank you, Gentlemen, 
on Lady Minto’s behalf for all you have so kindly said of 
her. Our interest in India will never cease, and we shall 
carry away with us affectionate recollections of the good 
wishes and of the memorable farewell tribute extended to 
us by the citizens of Bombay. 