
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S MESSAGE TO THE FIRST MEETING OF THE HEALTH SURVEY AND DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE HELD IN NEW DELHI ON THE 26TH OCTOBER 1943
Speaker: Lord Wavell
Audience: Health Survey and Development Committee
Date: 26 October 1943
Location: New Delhi
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech:



I very much regret that it is impossible for me to be 
present to address you at your first meeting and personally 
to wish you success in your important task. 

In the most highly organised countries of the world a 
large-scale system of social services guards the health of the 
community. The Maternity and Child Welfare Service, 
the school clinic, and the sickness insurance plan—all 
backed by well-equipped hospitals and highly qualified 
medical men—-prevent and cure disease in the individual. 
Through local authorities, and under the various statutes 
governing work in factories, provision is made for environmental hygiene. There are schemes of slum clearance and 
rehousing. The supply of water and food are competently 
supervised, and control is maintained over domestic and 
industrial wastes. I need not prolong the list; but I must 
add that behind the Social Services there is, in the advanced 
countries to which I refer, a powerful network of research 
organisations. 

In India we have traversed only a small part of the 
road towards National Health. I acknowledge the 
devoted work done, often in conditions of great difficulty, 
in this field; nor do I forget the poverty of India -that heavy 
disability which lies upon all agricultural countries whose 
populations are large and whose individual holdings of land 
are small. But I have no doubt that given guidance from 
a Committee such as this, and a determination to attack 
the problem, we can do much more than has hitherto been 
thought possible. 

It is not for me to attempt to guide you in your deliberations, but I may perhaps outline some of the questions 
which have occurred to me during the past two years. In 
our cities we have slums which are a disgrace to a civilised 
country. Much has been done by some of the Improvement 
Trusts—particularly in Calcutta— to remove the worst of 
the slum dwellings and to introduce light and air. But have 
we yet faced the gigantic task, of rehousing the slum 
dwellers in such a way and under such supervision that 



they will not relapse into their original condition? The 
financial implications of any rehousing scheme in which 
the displaced population cannot afford to pay something 
like an economic rent are very great and I am aware of all 
the difficulties. But is it not time for us at least to face 
the problem and to see what can be done about it? Again, 
although in some of our cities we have excellent water- 
supply and sanitary system, in others little have yet been 
done to produce hygienic conditions. Then there is malaria, 
the universal scourage, which probably causes more ill-health and inefficiency than any other one factor in the health field. Have we yet made sufficient use of the 
admirable work of the -Malaria Institute? Could insecticides 
be made from Indian-grown materials on a scale and at a 
cost which would render their nation-wide use possible? 
Could not more be done to provide protective materials— 
such as mosquito netting and mosquito wire—and could 
not these things be made on a larger scale in India? The 
average family may lie unable to afford them, but their use 
could undoubtedly be extended. We certainly need more 
maternity and child welfare centres, more school clinics, 
and more qualified medical men both for preventive and for 
curative medicine. What prospects are there of improving 
the medical and health services in the villages? Can 
medical men be attracted to the villages as private 
practitioners? Why is there so much difficulty in establishing an adequate nursing service? Two other points which 
occur to me are the possibility of improving the production 
of home-grown drugs, and the need for the development of 
research organisations in addition to those we already have. 

I have stated these questions not because I believe 
that they cover the whole ground, but because they show 
how the defects in our present organisation strike a layman 
who has not in the past been directly connected in his work 
with the medical and public health administration of the 
country. Your task will be to cover the ground as 
adequately as you can, and I have no doubt that in doing 
so you will not neglect the experience gained and the results 
achieved in other countries—especially those whose 
economy is comparable to that of India. 

In conclusion I should like to express appreciation of 
the public, spirit which has inspired you at considerable 
personal self-sacrifice to undertake this heavy task. I shall 
watch with deep interest the progress of your enquiries and 
I wish you all success in your labours.