
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Curzon
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 30 December 1898
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is described in the book.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Bombay Chamber of 
Commerce,— It is with peculiar pleasure that I have received 
at your hands, Sir (in whom I recognise an old schoolfellow 
and friend of my own), the address which you have just 
read, and the courteous and instructive contents of which I 
desire to acknowledge. I say “with peculiar pleasure" 
because, in this great industrial and trading city, which 
along with a beauty all its own, reminds me of some of the 
great hives of manufacture and labour in my own country, 
it seems befitting that the views of the mercantile classes 
should be placed before me by the authorised exponents of 
those interests ; and because my experience elsewhere has 
already brought me into frequent and agreeable contact with 
Chambers of Commerce. As Under-Secretary of the 
Foreign Office at home, and as head of the Commercial 
Department there, I have, during the past three years, been 
placed in constant communication with analogous organisations in England ; and I have learned to what an extent the views of Government may be shaped, and their action 
assisted, by the advice, the authority, and the trained 
information which such bodies are in a position to afford. I doubt not that a similar experience awaits me in India, and to any representations that you, or associations of like 
character and influence, may care, from time to time, to 
address to me, I can promise in advance a respectful and 
interested attention. You have been good enough to congratulate me upon my appointment to the high office which I am about to assume. I accept your congratulations ; and 
may I in return ask you to be the recipients by proxy of 
the thanks of Lady Curzon and myself for the magnificent 
welcome which we have met with to-day at the hands of 
all sections of the population of this great city. The 
continuous miles of people in the streets, and the enthusiasm 
with which they greeted us, were incidents that will live 
long in our memory, and that will never fail to revive 
delightful recollections of Bombay. 

Gentlemen, your address proceeds to bring before my 
notice a number of subjects in which you. are keenly interested, but upon which, while you are from the nature of your experience and your occupations qualified to form 
and to express definite opinions, I shall be doing no injustice to your imaginations if I say that you do not at this stage expect any similar declaration from myself. A 
Viceroy setting foot in that capacity for the first time upon 
these shores can hardly be expected, and would be singularly 
ill-advised, within four hours of his landing, to make a pronouncement upon such abstruse questions as Currency reform, the attraction of British capital to India, the 
utilisation for commercial purposes of the cash balances 
temporarily accumulated in the coffers of Government, and 
the particular railways which ought, or ought not, to be 
included in the programme of construction. Upon these 
matters I shall, of course, profit by the counsel of your 
Governor, and by the advice of the expert colleagues by 
whom I shall presently be surrounded ; and while studying 
them, I shall bear in mind the authoritative character of the 
representations which you have made. 

Gentlemen, it only remains for me to endorse the hopes 
with which you conclude your address, that a period of 
returning peace and prosperity, of which I think that 
here are already some signs, may await this recently 
afflicted country. A sensational administration is the last 
prospect that any incoming Viceroy can desire, and, although the cup of destiny is filled by other hands than his, he may yet, with a clear conscience promise, during his term of 
office the fullest devotion of which he may be capable to 
the domestic interests, and to the material development of 
the vast populations committed to his care. 

