
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNCIPALITY
Speaker: Lord Minto
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 18 November 1905
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. President end Gentlemen,— I value all the more 
sincerely the cordiality of your welcome to me as your 
in-coming Viceroy in that you associate your words of 
greeting with so grateful an appreciation of the public 
services of my ancestor, Lord Minto, whom after a lapse of 
nearly a hundred years our King and Emperor has appointed 
me to succeed in the administration of His Majesty's 
mighty Indian Empire.  

Arriving as I did yesterday in the midst of the fascinating 
scenery and colouring of the East to be received by the 
Corporation of this great City of Bombay, it is impossible 
not to look back with wonder and admiration on the history 
which so many great names have helped to make since the 
Governor-General of Bengal and his staff landed from the 
little frigate Modeste in the surf boats of Madras. 

It has been a history built up by great soldiers and 
statesmen from whom we have taken over a magnificent 
inheritance, the consolidated result of their labours and 
devotion, an inheritance the perpetuity of which British 
statesmen and Indian Princes, British and Indian troops 
will together proudly guarantee. 

And now that the stormy struggles of early days are 
past it is to a united strength and a united patriotism that 
I, an administrator about to take up the reins of office, look 
for assistance in furthering that sense of security and rest 
throughout the length and breadth, of India so indispensable 
for the development of her internal resources and her 
over-sea trade, for the careful consideration of her vital 
necessities, and the general happiness of her people. 
[Applause.) 

I thank you sincerely, Mr. President, for your kind 
expressions towards Lady Minto and my family. The 
women of India will, I know, find a sympathetic friend in 
Lady Minto, I assure you we are both very grateful for 
the welcome you have extended to us, and look forward to 
the home and the interests we hope to share with you in 
the coming years. {Loud applause.)




