
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S SPEECH AT THE UNVEILING OF THE BUST OF HIS LATE HIGHNESS THE MAHARAJA OF BIKANER IN THE CHAMBER OF PRINCES HALL ON THURSDAY, THE 14TH OCTOBER 1943
Speaker: Lord Linlithgow
Audience: Chamber of Princes
Date: 14 October 1943
Location: New Delhi
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Your Highness. — In spite of the profound feelings 
of loss and regret which must inevitably pervade this sad 
preclude to our session I count myself fortunate to be 
afforded, in response to the kind invitation voiced on Your 
Highnesses' behalf by your Chancellor, this opportunity 
to pay, in this Chamber which he loved so well and which 
has so often resounded to his eloquence, one more tribute to 
the great personality of Maharaja Sir Ganga Singhji of 
Bikaner and his outstanding services to the Princely 
Order.

The occasion when, in March 1941, I had the honour 
to unveil the effigies of three other distinguished Princes, 
all of whom, as I then remarked, had just claims to be 
described as fathers of this Chamber, is still fresh in my 
memory. To many who were present on that occasion the 
thought must have occurred, as it certainly did to me, that 
the last of the four niches in the wall before me was inevitably reserved for the Maharaja of Bikaner, whose services to this Chamber, which His Highness the Chancellor has just recounted, were-- and are perhaps likely to remain — unique and unparalleled. And in all our minds that 
thought must have been accompanied by the hope that 
His Highness might yet be spared for many years and that 
India and the King-Emperor might count upon him at least 
until the war had been won. But that hope was not to be 
fulfilled and the fourth niche is no longer empty. 

The services and achievements which we are commemorating today have been so fully and feelingly reviewed 
by your Chancellor that it is unnecessary for me to recapitulate them. I would only associate myself with all that he has said and again express my gratitude for the 
opportunity to salute the memory of His late Highness not 
only as a great and inspiring leader but as one whose 
personal friendship I am proud to have enjoyed through 
so many years. The inspiration of a great poet enables 
him sometimes to say in a few pregnant words something 
that an ordinary mortal could not achieve even in pages 
of laboured prose. And no one, I think, would grudge to 
the late Maharaja of Bikaner the application of familiar 
lines which, though written centuries ago, seem to me in- 
comparably appropriate on this sad occasion : — 

"He was a man. Take him for all in all, we shall 
not look upon his like again". 