
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Irwin
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 1 April 1926
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Mr. President and Gentlemen, — I greatly value the 
cordial welcome you have extended to me on behalf of 
the citizens of this great city of Bombay. I am the more 
deeply gratified by your observations, because you have 
greeted me, not as a stranger, but as one who comes 
among you with family associations of service on behalf 
of India. When some twenty years ago it fell to me myself to spend a short time in India, I little thought that I might one day return to be responsible for its administration. For the last five years the weight of that responsibility has been faithfully and untiringly sustained by 
Lord Reading, and it has not been without some natural 
misgiving that I have surveyed the magnitude of the field 
in which I am, following him, to labour. 

But if India, is great, India is also generous, and I take 
courage from the esteem in which the name of my grandfather is still held among you. Your kindly words in his regard are evidence that India is not unmindful of services 
rendered to her, and will reinforce my determination 
to work for the discharge of the duties entrusted to me by 
His Majesty the King Emperor. 

As you observe, it is fitting that the future representative of His Majesty the King Emperor should be 
received on landing in India at this Gateway with its 
precious memories of Their Imperial Majesties. For I 
come to you, not only to be the future Governor-General 
of India appointed by the King Emperor and entrusted 
with the guidance of his Government in India, but as His 
Majesty’s future Viceroy also. I therefore come charged 
with that spirit of sympathy and trust, and with that 
ardent desire to promote the welfare of India and the 
happiness of her people with which His Majesty's feelings 
towards India have always been instinct. 

Gentlemen, you have spoken of the wide responsibilities 
which you bear in the civic administration of this city. 
It is my hope at no distant date to make myself acquainted 
at first hand with some of the problems, and to see some 
of the improvements to which you have made allusion. I 
am gratified to observe that in the forefront of your projects you place the relief of suffering, the improvement of public health and the extension of education. I am 
likewise impressed by the courage with which you face 
your task, and the manifest enthusiasm by which you 
are inspired. In no directions may you more surely give 
expression to the lofty ambition of promoting the moral 
and material happiness of our fellow men. 

I can well realise the especial difficulties which confront you in Bombay, where East meets West and where 
you deal at one and tho same time with a populous oriental city, a great centre of flourishing industries, and a vast cosmopolitan port. In all wise proposals for the 
amelioration of social conditions and the improvement of 
amenities in the capital of the Presidency, I feel sure that 
you may count upon the warm sympathy of its Governor 
Sir Leslie Wilson. It is a matter of keen regret to me, 
not less I am sure than it is to you, that His Excellency 
is not present with us to-day. We all share the fervent 
hope that Lady Wilson may be speedily and completely 
restored to health. 

I take note of the passage in your Address in which 
you claim for Bombay more generous treatment in financial and other matters. You will not expect me now to 
make any pronouncement on these subjects. It would 
not, indeed, be proper for me to do so until I have had 
time to make such enquiries for myself as will enable me 
to gain a just perspective of Indian affairs. But I can at 
least assure you that these enquiries will be informed with 
sympathy for your difficulties, with personal attention to 
your claims, and with a firm determination to hold the 
scales even between the conflicting claims of all classes,
communities and provinces. 

Neither will you, I am confident, expect one, who is 
only on the threshold of his Viceroyalty, to speak to you 
to-day on the vast and momentous constitutional questions 
which are implicit in your reference to provincial autonomy and to the position of Indians overseas. On such grave matters, India has a right to claim that those who 
come to serve her, should come with minds open to the 
free impact of Indian thought. It is accordingly natural 
and right that you should take this, the earliest opportunity, of placing before me, both the anxieties and the aspirations which occupy your minds ; and it will be 
both my duty and my pleasure to spare no efforts, so 
far as I rightly may, for the relief of those anxieties, and 
the understanding of those aspirations. 

I am touched by the warm welcome you have offered 
to Lady Irwin. Let me assure you that she looks forward 
eagerly to her life in India with the opportunities 
that it must afford of carrying on the great work performed by Lady Reading and her predecessors. The 
women and children of India in particular may count on 
her unfailing sympathy, and all well conceived projects that 
may assist the forces engaged in constant battle with 
suffering and disease, and may make for the enhancement 
of the general welfare of the poor, will find in her a sure 
and ready friend. 

Gentlemen, once more I thank you for the kindness 
with which you have received me, and for your generous 
wishes for my success in the task on which I am about 
to enter. 

To no man is it given to forecast the future, or to 
predict what work it may be given to any one of us to 
do for India. But whatever the record of these next 
years, one thing for myself I can unreservedly declare, 
that you have to-day welcomed an earnest and sincere 
well-wisher of India at her Gate. 