
Title: FAREWELL BROADCAST TO THE PEOPLE OF INDIA
Speaker: Lord Mountbatten
Audience: People of India
Date: 20 June 1948
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This speech was made via All-India Radio
Additional Audiences:

Speech:




When I was first asked to interrupt my naval career to become the last Viceroy of India, I must confess that I 
viewed the prospect with considerable trepidation. After 
serving in South-East Asia from 1943 to 1946, during all of 
which time I had a Rear-Headquarters in Delhi, I felt that 
I could to some extent appreciate the complexity of the situation which would confront the Viceroy on whom the task of 
transferring power would fall. But when I arrived out in 
India and was able to see the problem for myself at close 
quarters, it appeared to present even more difficulties than I 
had supposed. 

There was one bright feature, however, in the general 
gloom—and it was perhaps the most important feature that 
one could have wished for. This was the determination of all 
those with whom I had to deal—whether they were leaders 
in the political field or in any other walk of life—that a 
realistic solution could and must be found. And from the 
moment that I arrived, difficulties which had seemed insurmountable began to melt in the atmosphere of mutual trust 
and goodwill with which those leaders combined to a me 
in my task. 

I can never say with what emotion I received the invitation (which was generously ratified by the Constituent 
Assembly as its first act during the midnight meeting of 
14-15 August) to be the first Constitutional Governor- 
General of free India during the Interim Period. I gladly 
agreed to stay on until 31 March 1948 (the date specifically 
mentioned in the Indian Independence Act as the end of the 
Interim Period) and, later, I was deeply honoured by the 
invitation to extend this time until June. It has been difficult 
to decide at what juncture it would be in India’s best interests 

that an Indian should be appointed in my place; but I hope 
that time will show that I have stayed long enough to be useful; but not too long, so as to deprive India of the right which 
her freedom has conferred on her, to choose one of her own 
people to be the head of the State. It is a particular pleasure 
to me that the choice should fall on my friend Rajaji, for no 
one is better qualified to take over the post. 

It has been an unforgettable experience for myself and 
my family to have been privileged to be in India during these 
past, historic fifteen months. India has a great history behind 
her—and she has a great history ahead of her. She has many 
problems, grave problems such as would be bound to face any 
nation suddenly achieving freedom—but magnified in her 
case by the fact that this freedom has been attained at a time 
of unparalleled world-wide difficulties, and in a country that 
contains nearly one-sixth of the human race. But I know that 
she will solve these problems and that her difficulties will be 
surmounted: India is destined to fill a high place in the world, 
and to play a high part in the world’s affairs. 

India is potentially as rich a country as any in the world. 
Quite apart from the wealth within the ground itself, such as 
coal, iron ore, manganese and all the other valuable minerals, 
quite apart from the immense possibility of further prosperity 
from hydro-electric power and irrigation schemes, there re- 
mains the greatest source of wealth that any country can 
have—the hundreds of millions of its ordinary people. For 
with them rest not only the age-long traditions of manual 
labour but the inheritance of the new technical age and of the 
ever-increasing skill which further training will provide. Inventive genius, which is latent in the Indian people, can now 
be harnessed as never before for the benefit and prosperity of 
themselves and of the whole world. Clearly the spread of universal education and the advance of social service and conscience are essential if those creative forces are to be fully 
realised. These things will come about, but for all that India’s 
greatest asset will, I am sure, always lie in the character of 
her people. I myself saw the most stupendous crowds in my 
life in India—on Independence Day, at Gandhiji’s funeral, at 

the Mela at Allahabad, and on other historic occasions. The 
good nature, and friendliness of these vast masses were un- 
forgettable; I realised then that I was seeing before me the 
raw material of India’s future greatness. 

Your draft Constitution takes its place among the great 
documents of liberty and human rights. Be worthy of it. 
Goethe wrote that only he is worthy of true freedom who is 
prepared to establish it himself in his everyday life. It is not 
the fact that high ideals are written into your Constitution 
that will help you, but the stern resolve with which you 
yourselves determine to suppress all that could militate against 
these ideals being put into practice. 

I would like to end this talk on a personal note. During 
our fifteen months in India my wife and I have visited every 
single Province, and the majority of the major States; and 
wherever we have gone, we have been received with universal 
friendliness and kindness. My wife, who has been so closely 
associated with medical, educational and welfare work, 
amongst the refugees, the sick, and the abducted women, has 
had an even greater opportunity of meeting the people than 
I have had myself; and I know how deeply she has appreciated the help and co-operation given to her by all officials, 
and the way that she has been received by all the people with 
whom she has come in contact. 

Wherever we may go in the future, both of us will remember with a sense of pride and of real humility the wonderful kindness and friendship we have received on all sides. We 
shall continue to love India and to take the deepest personal 
interest in her future welfare. 