
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE AGRA MUNICIPALITY
Speaker: Lord Curzon
Audience: Agra Municipal Corporation
Date: 11 November 1905
Location: Agra
Notes: This is a reply address. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen, — It is very good of you to address me a 
second time, and a reference to what passed between us on 
the previous occasion just six years ago is of interest as 
marking the distance that has been travelled by both of us 
since December 1899. 

You have given to me this afternoon a record of your 
municipal progress in the interval. The central position of 
Agra and its greatly improved railway connections are a 
source of no small advantage which all your competitors do 
not equally enjoy. Successive Lieutenant-Governors, and 
notably in recent years Sir Antony MacDonnell and Sir 
James LaTouche, have devoted the closest personal attention to the city and its buildings. You can never fail to attract visitors, and in my judgment are certain to attract 
them in rapidly increasing numbers. With a Municipality 
therefore that is devoted, as yours appears to be, to the conscientious pursuit of its duties, which consist in making life here as healthy as possible for your residents and citizens, 
and with a reasonable immunity from the scourges of plague 
and famine by which you are liable to be and have been 
seriously afflicted, Agra is as certain as any place in India 
of a future of steadily advancing prosperity. It is a proud 
trust therefore that you have in your hands, and it must be 
rendered all the easier and more agreeable to you by the 
fact that Agra is one of those places which from its exquisite beauty and its many physical advantages cannot fail to excite in a peculiar degree the love and the local patriotism 
of its inhabitants. 

You will shortly have the honour of welcoming here Their 
Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Wales, and I 
have confidently assured them that there is no place in India 
where their stay will be more pleasant or which will leave a 
more abiding impression upon their memories. 

My own connection with Agra has, as you know, been 
mainly archaeological during the past six years. I think that 
in my numerous visits here and in the labours of renovation 
and repair that we have undertaken, I have learned to love 
this place more than any other spot in India. Here it is 
always peaceful and always beautiful, though sometimes, 
I must admit, a little warm ; and with each successive visit 
I have felt the sense of something accomplished and of visible 
progress made. This has been due to the enthusiasm with 
which the Lieutenant-Governor, the local officials, the Public 
Works Engineers, and the Director-General of Archaeology, 
Mr. Marshall, and his subordinates have all thrown themselves into the task. To every one of them it has, I am convinced, been a labour of love, and all of us have felt that 
we were not merely atoning for the errors of our predecessors, 
but leaving something that will recover or increase the 
fascinations of Agra for those who come after us. 

It is just 18 years since I first drove up to the Taj through 
dusty lanes and a miserable bazar ; since I first was 
conducted over the fort, where the Jahangir Mahal and the 
exquisite buildings anterior to the time of Shah Jehan were 
either in the occupation of the Military or were not shown 
to visitors at all, and since I visited Sikandra, then a deserted 
wilderness, and Fatehpur Sikri, glorious in its beauty, but 
crumbling to decay. As I visit all these places again, and 
note their renovated condition, their orderly approaches, 
and the spirit of reverence with which they are now 
preserved, I cannot help feeling that the work is one of 
which we may feel proud. There is this also to be said 
about the work of archaeological restoration throughout India, 
that it is one in which European and Indian can and do 
equally join. There is nothing to which the inhabitants of 
this country are more attached than their antiquities ; there 
is nothing by which they were more distressed than their 
desecration and decay ; and few things, I am convinced, 
have done more to bring the two peoples together than the 
consciousness that the English are devoting themselves with 
sincerity and ardour to the restoration of the monuments of 
a race and a religion which are not their own but for which 
they feel the most profound respect and veneration. No 
co-operation of this description is to be despised, for it has a 
value greatly in excess of its immediate or concrete results. 

Gentlemen, Lady Curzon and I rejoice to be spending our 
last days in India in your midst, and we are grateful to you 
for joining in a farewell by the cordiality and unanimity of 
which we have been greatly impressed. {Loud and continued applause.)
