
Title: BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Hardinge
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 19 November 1910
Location: Mumbai
Notes: In the book, prior to the speech, there is information about who all were present for it. This is also a reply address and the address being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences: Assembled dignitaries

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Municipal Corporation of Bombay,— I thank you very warmly for the 
address that you have presented, and for the kindly welcome you have extended to me on setting foot for the first time upon the shores of India. 

I am grateful for the appreciative references made to 
my grandfather’s services in India, and in assuming the 
burden and responsibilities of the great office that has 
been confided to me, I take courage from his example. 
Much as he desired peace, it was his fate and misfortune 
to be involved in an internal war, but he nevertheless 
succeeded during the course of his administration in 
contributing to the material advancement of the people 
of India. 

Times have changed since the appointment of an 
Indian student to be a Deputy Magistrate was regarded 
as a remarkable concession and innovation, but the 
present and the future are rife with problems of a more 
complex and more difficult character than those of the 
past. It shall be my aim to face them with courage and 
sympathy, and to maintain the policy initiated by Lord 
Minto who has so calmly and steadily met the difficulties of the past five years, and is so soon to bid you good-bye. 

With the City of Bombay I have an older and even 
closer link than through my grandfather, for I am told 
that in the Cathedral of your City, there is a monument 
which according to the inscription it bears was " erected 
by the public spirit of Bombay to consecrate the memory 
of Captain George Nicholas Hardinge of the Royal 
Navy,” who fell for British India in the moment of 
victory after a three days’ combat, and the capture off 
the coast of Ceylon, of a large French Frigate, which 
had been the terror of the Indian Seas. This was my 
great-uncle, and the Naval engagement took place 102 
years ago. 

Mr. President and Gentlemen, you will not expect me 
to make any pronouncement at the present moment upon 
the two questions of great though local importance, 
upon which you have touched in your address. It is 
not unlikely that they may come before me in the future, 
in which case you may rest assured that your views, and 
your wishes will receive my earnest and careful consideration. I share your hope that your great and beautiful City may continue to advance in the path of progress and 
prosperity, and there is every reason to be hopeful for 
the future when we look back upon the past. Two and-a-half centuries ago, Bombay was described by one 
writer as only “a poor little Island,” but even in those
times one of the greatest of your Governors, who must 
have been imbued with a prophetic instinct, spoke of it 
as "a City which by God’s assistance is intended to be 
built,” and you have now another Governor like him to 
whom you can confidently turn for help and guidance in 
all matters affecting the prosperity and progressive 
development of Bombay the Beautiful. 


On behalf of Lady Hardinge I thank you for your 
words of cordial welcome, and I can confidently assure 
you that it will be a source of happiness to her to do 
what she can in her own proper sphere to contribute to 
the welfare and needs of the women of India. 


In expressing to you once more my warm appreciation of your address, allow me to thank you, Mr. President and Gentlemen, for the beautiful casket in which 
it is enclosed.