
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Willingdon
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 18 April 1931
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

ADDRESS OF WELCOME PROM THE MUNICIPAL 
CORPORATION OF BOMBAY. 


Mr. President and Members of the Municipal 
Corporation of Bombay. 

May I at once thank you very gratefully for the 
most generous and encouraging expressions contained in 
your address in welcoming two old friends back again 
to your city on their return to India which has in very 
truth become to them their second home within the
British Empire. We are deeply grateful to you, 
gentlemen, far your cordial greeting, and are delighted 
to see around us so many old friends in this distinguished 
gathering which has assembled here to meet us today.

As I walked up the steps just now leading up to 
this fine building rightly called the Gateway of India, 
and in the erection of which I am proud to feel that, in 
years gone by, the then Government of Bombay and I 
had some part, I had forcibly recalled to my mind a 
very similar occasion in the month of April eighteen years 
ago when I arrived for the first time in India to take 
over the duties of Governor of the Presidency of Bombay 
and commenced an intimate association with the people 
of your city and this Presidency which lasted for six 
happy and eventful years and included the four years 
of the Great War. I still vividly remember all our  
activities during those years, years of strain and anxiety 
not only to India but to the whole British Empire, years 
during which this city became the base of all the military 
activities of India, years when in our efforts to do our 
full part to secure victory for our arms I received the 
whole-hearted co-operation of all the Princes and people 
in the Presidency, working for one great common purpose 
to achieve one great common aim, safety for our Empire, 
peace for the civilized world. May I read you a few 
lines of my reply to the farewell address from the Bombay 
Municipality when I gave up my duties as Governor of 
the Presidency, which will bettor express to you my 
feelings at that time. I said then “the times we have 
lived in have brought with them burdens and responsibilities heavier and more anxious than any of our predecessors have borne, heavier and more anxious, I trust, 
than any generation that succeeds us will ever be called 
upon to face ; through all that time I have been constantly 
supported by the generous help, the loyalty and the 
friendship of the citizens of every part of the Presidency, 
of every creed and race and every rank of society, and 
more particularly by the citizens of this city of Bombay.” 
Today I return to you and you tell me in your address 
that ‘few Viceroys have been called upon to preside over 
the Government of India at a more critical period of her 
history. With the recollection of those former years 
still fresh in my mind I would only say that we have 
successfully surmounted together anxious and critical 
times in the past, and on the threshold of my service 
amongst you as Viceroy of India, I feel sure I may ask 
with all confidence for that same co-operation, that same 
loyalty and friendship from the Princes and people of 
India to help me to overcome all the difficulties that lie 
before us, to lead our great country on in a spirit of 
mutual good-will, freedom, fairplay and obedience to the 
laws of the land so that she may move forward rapidly 
towards her goal of responsible Government, to a position 
of absolutely equal partnership with the other Dominions 
under the Crown. 

In a word I shall endeavour to carry on the great 
work which has been done during the past five years by 
Lord Irwin, whose sympathy, patience, courage and 
earnestness of purpose have secured for him the abiding 
affection, regard and admiration of all classes of the 
people of this country. 

In turning to the various matters you have referred 
to in your address, which more particularly affect the 
future of your city I am sure you will not expect my 
remarks to be more than very general in their character. 
I congratulate you warmly on the, great developments 
which you have carried out for the benefit of your 
citizens, since I was last amongst you, and I look forward 
to seeing for myself at an early date some of the improvements which you have achieved. I feel confident 
that your wise and far-seeing efforts to make your city 
worthy of the special position which it holds as the 
Gateway of India will be amply rewarded when the heavy 
load of world-wide economic depression has passed away, 
and a renewal of confidence and prosperity returns, as it 
surely will, not apply to your city and this country, but 
to the whole of the civilized world. 

I note with satisfaction that in spite of bad times, 
the Corporation are willing to shoulder additional taxation, 
the form of which I understand to be a matter at present 
under discussion. I can only say that if the proposed 
taxation takes a form that will ultimately require the 
sanction of the Government of India. I will not fail to 
take into account the point of view which has been so 
clearly put forward by you in your address. 

As regards the financial relationship between Provincial Governments and Local Bodies, it is clear that 
the whole question is one which must be thoroughly 
considered in connection with the new Constitution. I 
would merely observe that I realize that if local self-government is to be successful, it should be given the means to raise the revenue necessary for the discharge 
of its obligations. 

With all your problems, however, I hope to make 
myself further acquainted after consultation with your 
Governor, His Excellency Sir Frederick Sykes, to whom 
Bombay and her people are so much indebted for his wise 
guidance and unfailing sympathy, and very earnestly do 
I hope that as a result of the rest which he is being 
ordered to take by his medical advisers, Sir Frederick 
will soon return to Bombay completely restored in health 
and strength. 

May I in conclusion particularly thank you, gentlemen, for the special greeting you have extended to my 
wife. I assure you that she and I deeply appreciate the 
warm-hearted kindness with which you have welcomed us 
back amongst you this morning. Bombay city, our first 
home in India, will always have a very warm place in both 
our hearts and we echo your prayer that, under the 
guiding hand of a great Providence, the blessings of 
peace, progress and increasing prosperity may be the 
happy lot of your city and its people in the coming years. 