
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE PEOPLE OF BEHAR
Speaker: Lord Elgin
Audience: Deputation representing the people of Bihar
Date: 3 January 1899
Location: Kolkata
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being responded to is described in the book. 
Additional Audiences: Maharaja Harballabh Narayan Singh of Sonbarsa, Maharaja Bahadur Sir Ravaneshwar Prasad Singh of Gidhour

Speech: 

Gentlemen,— I am doubly indebted to you for coming 
so far from the Province of Behar to shake hands with 
me for the last time. I must freely admit that I have not 
seen so much of your Province as I could have wished, 
and as I have no doubt it would have been profitable for 
me to do, but we have a saying that "You can't put into 
a pint pot a quart measure”, and the time at the disposal 
of the Viceroy may be likened to a pint pot, and the 
number of places he could with advantage visit would 
certainly fill more than a quart measure. It is true that 
now-a-days we can travel faster than our predecessors, 
but then there are a good many more places that we are 
called upon to visit, and the result is that we have in the 
end less time at our disposal, and the visits that we do 
pay are often very hurried visits. All the same I retain 
a very lively recollection of the visit that I did pay to the 
Province of Behar, and the interesting sights I saw there, 
and the very kind reception that I met with, and I am now 
able to carry away with me the remembrance of to-day and 
of the kindly manner in which you, on behalf of the Province of Behar, have come to bid me farewell. I am also greatly indebted to you for the appreciative manner in 
which you have spoken of my work during my term of 
office, and the way in which I have dealt with the 
calamities that have fallen upon India during that time. I 
agree with you that, as regards affairs on the Frontier, 
we may look back with pride to the exploits of our 
soldiers. It must be a still greater satisfaction to you to 
know that peace has been completely restored in those 
regions, and I need not tell you how gratifying it is to me 
to feel that I am able to hand over charge to my successor 
under these circumstances. I should be ungrateful if I did 
not also respond by a passing allusion to the way in which 
you have referred — and it has often been referred to 
during my stay in India — to the incident of my father's 
life which we of his family have always treasured as one 
of the most striking instances of his noble character. 

Gentlemen , I cannot forget that you in the Province 
of Behar have also had your share of the calamities of these 
years. The famine at one time threatened to be very 
serious in Behar, but it was met bravely both by the 
officials of the Government charged with the administration, and also by those amongst you who were responsible for the lives and welfare of the many people of the Province ; and I cannot help mentioning in this connection the man of such vast generosity whom you have lost 
from amongst you — the Maharaja of Darbhanga, who 
showed a noble example in the way in which he managed 
his Raj during the time of the famine. 

And now, Gentlemen, I have only to respond to your 
kind wishes of farewell. You have expressed every 
sentiment of friendship for Lady Elgin and myself, and 
have sent us off with good wishes. I hope you will believe that we on our part shall always have very near our hearts the remembrance of the people of India and the 
people of Behar, and that we shall look with interest on, 
and hope to hear of the continued prosperity of you all. 
