
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Reading
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 3 April 1921
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Bombay Chamber of 
Commerce.— On behalf of Her Excellency and myself let me 
express to you my warm thanks for this address of welcome 
which is especially gratifying as coming from your body. 

You refer to the financial circumstances affecting the 
position of India and to such assistance as I was able to give
when Ambassador in the United States of America in relation 
to the serious position which at the moment had seemed 
to threaten India. It is but a few weeks ago in London that 
I took the opportunity of speaking for the first time of these 
events. Nothing was ever said at the time for very obvious 
reasons and after the war, so far as I am aware, America has 
never publicly referred to the arrangements between our 
Governments. I will only say that nothing could possibly 
have exceeded the goodwill of the American administration 
and Congress when they determined to help India when we 
were all engaged in a great war and when America realised 
the vital importance that the financial position of India should 
be maintained and should not be impaired by insidious propaganda or by conditions for which perhaps the war itself was responsible. I am glad that I as British Ambassador was 
associated with America in that vast transaction. I can 
assure you that no period was more exciting during my stay 
in America than the five days in which we were trying to get 
the Congress to pass the necessary laws to meet the situation 
as you will understand without public discussion. It was 
a war emergency measure, and it is noteworthy that the press 
of America which at the time well understood the situation 
was so anxious to be of assistance that it never mentioned a 
matter which lent itself so well to publicity. 

We watched with great anxiety the daily reports of the 
Metallic Reserve in India and calculated the possibilities of 
getting ships to India in time to relieve the situation. 

Gentlemen, it is natural that you should refer to the present 
condition of trade in India. Although I cannot suggest for 
one moment that it is a consolation yet it is worthy of observation that this condition is not peculiar to India, but is also to be found in other countries. Of course this is not of much 
help to the merchants of India, but is a factor to be borne in 
mind when we strive to arrive at the causes. We must go 
further back and pierce deeper in examination than by the 
consideration of the happenings during the last 12 months or 
24 months in relation to the rupee. 

Depreciated exchange is the natural consequence of the 
disturbance of the balance of trade. A fall in exchange in 
the value of the rupee of course plays a most important part 
in the affairs of the country. I am very interested to hear 
your observations which lay a specially peculiar stress upon 
the importance of Government allowing trade to find its own 
level and the merchants to find their own way through these 
various disturbances of trade which are so largely due to 
political causes and to the upheaval during and after the war 
and the consequent economic and industrial efforts, in themselves the causes of depreciated exchanges. I quite agree that Government control of trade can never be of avail except 
as a partial and temporary measure. It should be resorted 
to only in time of great emergency such as war or grave internal distress to take two of the most familiar instances. This is an opinion held by merchants and traders generally. But 
it is not desirable to be dogmatic on this subject. There may 
possibly be ways in which Government can be of some assistance. I guard myself at this moment from endorsing to the full the observation that Government control can be of no 
use, although I agree with the general trend of the observations you make. 

You further refer to the representations made by your 
Chamber to the Railway Committee which is now sitting. 
Obviously I cannot discuss in detail a matter which is subjudice. But I can certainly assure you that as far as my Government is concerned we shall not fail to consider your 
views most carefully, and I will add, also the representations 
which you have made in the address. It is always well to 
remember that transport plays a very important part in trade. 

I am not sure that it is always fully recognised that transport 
difficulties in the countries that purchase the goods you export 
contribute to the serious and even chaotic condition of foreign 
exchanges. I only make these observations for the purpose 
of assuring you that as far as I am concerned I am quite alive 
to the importance of developing transport in India for the 
purposes of the economic and industrial prosperity of India. 

I shall never underrate the effect of trade prosperity upon the 
welfare and happiness of the vast multitudes of the people. 
Very naturally at this important period you refer to the recent 
Progressive Reforms. They are an opportunity for the people 
of the country through their representatives of expressing 
their views and it is a satisfaction to one to hear as it must 
be to all those in favour of representative institutions, how 
well in a very short space of time these new Councils and 
generally speaking new institutions have progressed. 

You may count upon my Government keeping a vigilant 
eye upon the proposals that emanated from the Brussels 
Conference and otherwise in relation to foreign credits enabling 
purchases to be made where immediate payment is impossible 
or ordinary commercial credit is too speculative. 

Gentlemen, I am glad that I have had this opportunity 
of meeting you and receiving this address. A body such as 
yours can help very markedly towards contentment and 
happiness in India. 1 know that the King-Emperor and the 
British Empire, as well as the Government of India, can look 
to you and rely upon your loyalty and assistance in striving 
to co-operate with aU who are working for the benefit and 
prosperity of India. In this firm belief I take leave of you 
to-day with grateful recollections of your welcome to me. 