
Title: ADDRESS AT ST. XAVIER'S COLLEGE, BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Ripon
Audience: Students and Faculty of St. Xavier's College
Date: 19 December 1884
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. 
Additional Audiences: Other dignitaries

Speech: 

Your Excellency, my Lord and Gentlemen,- It is just 
about four years since I first had the good fortune to make 
acquaintance with St. Xavier's College in Bombay. I
thought that the sight which was then presented to me was a most remarkable one, but it has been greatly surpassed by that which I see before me now ; and I may 
truly say that I thank you with a deep sense of gratitude. 
(Loud cheers.) My testimony is not needed to the 
efficiency of this noble institution. The vast multitude 
which crowds its halls to-day is proof enough of its success. I perhaps might be suspected of a not unnatural partiality if I were to speak in terms of praise of this 
College. But you have had many a testimony of which no 
man can doubt the fairness, from persons of all races, 
creeds, and classes, who from time to time have visited 
this institution, and have given with respect to it a unanimous verdict. Gentlemen, that verdict has lately been confirmed by the cordial words of him who is at the head 
of the Government of this great Presidency. (Cheers.) It 
is but a few days since my right honourable friend Sir James 
Fergusson was here, and since he told you how highly he 
valued the work which was done in this institution. 
(Cheers.) But he has given you a proof stronger than 
words of what he thinks of St. Xavier’s College, for he and 
his colleagues have given on behalf of the government a 
grant of land for the erection of the new wing, and a contribution no less munificent than Rs. 60,000. (Cheers.) To me it is naturally a very great gratification to know of 
all these undoubted proofs of the progress of this institution and of the character of the work which is done here and I have listened to-day with special pleasure to that 
portion of your address, emanating from the students, past 
and present, of this College, in which you alluded in terms 
so just and so affectionate to the labours of those devoted 
men who are engaged in your instruction. (Cheers.) They 
deserve all the thanks and all the love which you can give them. Their motto is the motto of their Master, "Freely ye have received, freely give." Gentlemen, I have been 
engaged now for the space of over a month in saying a good 
deal upon the subject of education in India. I have had occasion to give expression to the very deep interest which I feel in the spread of that education in all its branches and 
in all directions. I shall not occupy your time to-night by 
repeating that which I have said upon other occasions. I
am firmly convinced that the God who gave to all of us in 
such large degree gifts of intellect and qualities of mind 
intended that those gifts should be employed, and that 
those qualities should be developed. I am convinced that 
he intended that those who have the care of nations, and 
those who possess wealth and cultivation themselves, should 
see that to their less fortunate brothers the means were afforded for intellectual development. (Cheers.) And I believe no less that it is your duly, my young friends, not 
to let these gifts which have been so richly showered upon 
you remain barren and undeveloped. But I would have you 
recollect that education is a means, and not an end. The vital 
question is how you will use those faculties when you have 
developed and have trained them. That is a question vital to 
yourselves because upon it depends your highest interests, 
and it is a question vital to your country because upon it depends her progress. The end even of intellectual education, if it is to fulfil its true purpose, is a moral end. If it 
is to reap all the rich results which it is capable of producing, and to confer upon you all the benefits which it is capable of gaining to you, you must make the real purpose 
of your intellectual training the strengthening and the 
elevating of your moral character. (Cheers.) I, gentlemen, claim tor the educated people of this country an increasing share in the administration of their own affairs. (Cheers.) I claim for them a gradually, but steadily, extending share of public duties (renewed cheering) of the 
offices of Government; and of the high pieces in the Government. But it is essential to such a policy that those who receive the education given here and in the other 
great educational institutions of the country should use 
that education for high and noble ends ; that they should use it, as I have said, to elevate and to strengthen their character. It was a remark of a German writer that the 
future of every country depends greatly upon the character 
of the young men under five-and-twenty. It was a true and a sound remark; and the future of India very much depends upon these young men whom I see around me, 
who have been brought up in this College, who have passed 
their university career, and who are about to enter upon 
the business of life. It rests very much with you to say 
whether the bright hopes which some believe are dawning 
upon India are to be realised or whether they are to be 
doomed to disappointment through your fault and your 
failure. Aim high, then, my young friends. Remember 
the great responsibilities which rest upon you for the 
advantages which you have received, and remember how 
much of India’s future is in your hands. (Cheers.) You 
who arc the inheritors of an ancient civilization and an 
ancient literature which flourished when European countries were the abode of barbarism, you who can trace back your intellectual history to the ages of the past, you owe 
to that history a great and continuous duty. But there is 
something higher yet even than patriotism itself, and you 
owe a duty to a higher power than India. It is God who 
has given you the faculties that are trained here ; it is God 
who has given you the powers that are being developed in 
this College, and He has entrusted them to you that you 
may use them for those ends for which He has given them, 
for His greater honour, and for the benefit of mankind. 
(Cheers.) 