
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Linlithgow
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 17 April 1936
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 



Mr. Mayor and Members of the Municipal Corporation of Bombay , — It gives me great pleasure to receive the address of welcome you have read to me. In 
particular, I thank you for the appreciative terms in 
which you so kindly refer to myself and to my past 
association with this country.

India is a land of warm affections and abiding 
loyalties. Now that I return to assume the new responsibilities which lie before me, I feel already from the cordiality with which you have received me that I am 
"back among friends" ready to give me their encouragement and support. I shall spare no effort in the years that I shall spend among you to do all that in me lies to 
give back in service to India some return for all that I 
have in the past received from India in kindness, 
sympathy and understanding. 

My work as Chairman of the Agricultural Commission, which, you mention, was to me of absorbing 
interest. It gave me opportunities, which I hope may now stand me in good stead, of moving among all classes and of learning something in a very personal way of their 
manner of life and modes of thought. The cultivator 
tilling his fields remains as ever the backbone of this country , and the foundation of her prosperity. I rejoice to know that the people of this great city appreciate the 
profound significance of agricultural improvement and 
that they have in mind the extent to which their own 
prosperity is linked with that of the farmers of India. 


The work of the Joint Parliamentary Committee, to 
which also you allude, is fresh in the public mind. I
counted it an honour and a privilege to preside over the 
Committee’s deliberations, to work with the delegates from 
India, and thus to come again into direct contact with 
Indian problems and with the hopes and aspirations of 
India’s people. I shall assume the arduous duties of my 
office at a time when the great changes contemplated by 
the Committee and since endorsed by the British Parliament are to be introduced. A great opportunity lies 
now to India’s hand. You will not expect pronouncements 
from me on this occasion as to the measures of 
constitutional reform which have for so long engaged the 
attention of statesmen in this country and at home ; but 
let me say to you that it is with hope and with confidence 
that I come to take my part in the great constructive work 
that lies before this country. 

This beautiful city, of which you are so justly proud,
has, as you tell me, not altogether escaped the ill effects 
of the economic depression which have made themselves 
felt in all parts of the world. I trust with you that the 
worst of those difficulties may now be behind us, and that 
we are at this time well set upon a period of recuperation. 
The citizens of Bombay deservedly enjoy a reputation for
industry, enterprise and public spirit. Imbued with these 
qualities they need fear no rivals. 

I have listened with great interest to your account of
the way in which difficulties have been met and civic 
amenities which are your especial charge, efficiently 
maintained. I am not of course, in a position to discuss 
your local needs, but I can assure you that in all matters, 
coming before me I shall not be found indifferent to the claims of this historic city. 

Lady Linlithgow wishes me to thank you for your 
very kind references to her. You may rest assured of 
her never-failing support to all that contributes to the 
welfare of the people of India. 

I would like before I conclude my remarks to take 
the opportunity of this, the first public utterance to be 
made by me in India, to pay a heart-felt tribute to the 
Viceroy whom, very shortly, I shall have to refer to as my 
predecessor. H. E. Lord Willingdon has guided the ship 
of State during an eventful and critical period with a 
distinction of which we are all aware. He came to his 
high office well equipped for the heavy responsibility which 
it involves by long service in India, by a close acquaintance 
with her problems and her personalities, and by a deep 
and informed sympathy for Indian culture and Indian 
aspirations. 

He leaves India now, after many years of devoted 
service to her interests, with the consciousness of work 
well done. 

I thank you once again Mr. Mayor, for the warmth 
of your welcome to us both today. I cannot overstate the degree of encouragement which, on the eve of assuming this great and onerous change, I derive from your kind and friendly words. We need your, encouragement and your help, for we are both fully alive to the responsibilities  and the magnitude of the task which lies before us, and I can only add in conclusion that in the fulfilment of 
that task I shall rely upon the loyalty and assistance of 
all those who are working for the benefit and prosperity 
of this great country. 