
Title: ADDRESS OF WELCOME FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Linlithgow
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 17 April 1936
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. President and Gentlemen,- I thank you on 
behalf of Lady Linlithgow and myself for the very 
cordial welcome which you have extended to us on our 
arrival in India. It is a source of very real encouragement to me, at the outset of the heavy task which lies before me, to know that I have the good wishes and the 
good-will of a body so important, and with so long and 
distinguished a history, as the Bombay Chamber of Commerce. 

You refer in your address to several matters of great 
interest on which I am sure you will not expect me to 
make any detailed comment at this stage. I have listened 
with close attention to the views you have expressed on 
the relative importance of agriculture and of other forms 
of industry in the economic fabric of India. Let me 
assure you of my full recognition of the vital importance 
of a proper and harmonious balance of these important 
elements in the economic life of any country. 

I share the pleasure you have expressed at the fact 
that this year the Finance Member has been able to 
present a Surplus Budget I am in entire accord with 
you as to the essential importance of the financial issue 
as affecting the successful working of the New Constitution It would be premature for me to express any view on the specific suggestions you have advanced, but you 
may rest assured that I have listened to them with the 
respect they deserve, and that I am fully alive to the  
weight of the considerations which you urge. 

The problem of the co-ordination and control of 
communications is one of great and growing importance 
in India, and one in which you can rely on me to take a 
close personal interest. I was impressed by your remarks, 
both on the question generally, and as bearing on the 
creation of a Portfolio of Communications, and I can 
undertake without hesitation to assure you that they will
not be lost sight of. 

In conclusion, I wish again to express to you my 
gratitude for the good wishes which you have expressed 
in your address for Lady Linlithgow, as well as for myself. 

May I reiterate your hope that during my term of office 
the "improvement in political and economic conditions 
in India will be maintained and extended to the benefit 
and contentment of all" ? If, during the term of my 
Viceroyalty, it is vouchsafed to me to see that hope 
fulfilled, I shall indeed consider myself fortunate. 

Gentlemen, I thank you. 