
Title: REPLY TO ADDRESS OF WELCOME PRESENTED BY THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
Speaker: Lord Mountbatten
Audience: People of India
Date: 31 March 1947
Location: New Delhi
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech:


On behalf of my wife and myself, I thank you for your 
kind words of greeting and for the honour you have 
done us in giving us this welcome to the capital city, 
which is to be our home in India. 

Twenty-five years ago, I wandered among the foundations of this city, and tried to imagine what it would be like. 
When I returned here in 1943, it was fascinating to see this 
city, more splendid by far than I could have foreseen. 

I can understand your objection to seeing temporary 
houses lingering on among beautiful buildings with a high 
artistic standard; and I share your hope that it will soon be 
possible to proceed with the planned development of New 
Delhi. 

The future of this great city, which is built on the site of 
historic Delhi, and where at this moment the representatives 
of many Asiatic peoples are assembled, is inseparable from the 
future of India, which from ancient times has been the great 
cultural centre of Asia. 

I have been very interested to hear of the various schemes 
which the Municipal Committee has in hand, and I congratulate you on the high standards which you have maintained, in spite of all the difficulties of the war and its 
succeeding years. I hope that perhaps later on you will give 
me an opportunity of seeing something of your work. 

During the last few years my wife has felt very privileged 
to have had close contact with Indian troops, Prisoners of 
War, and the Medical, Nursing and Welfare Services of India. 
She hopes to continue working closely with all medical, nursing and welfare activities; and is particularly pleased to hear 

that a Nursing College with a University Degree has been 
established in New Delhi. This will be a great help to the 
Nursing Profession of India, which is at present so sadly inadequate to meet the needs of the community. 

We thank you again most warmly for the welcome you 
have extended to us both. 