
Title: SPEECH BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY IN REPLY TO THE FAREWELL ADDRESS PRESENTED BY THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COMMITTEE ON SATURDAY, THE 16TH OCTER 1943 
Speaker: Lord Linlithgow
Audience: New Delhi Municipal Committee
Date: 16 October 1943
Location: New Delhi
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 



Mr. Bryant, Mrs. Sumer Chand and Gentlemen,--
On Her Excellency's behalf and my own I thank you 
most warmly for your address by which we have been 
deeply touched. Your city has been our home for 7 1/2 
eventful and laborious years, years in which we have 
known both satisfaction and disappointment, years of 
sunshine and shadow, of storm and intermittently of calm, 
years certainly that will live in our recollection always. 
Let me at once say how much pleasure it has given my 
wife and myself to receive a token of such generous 
appreciation from a body of such standing and distinction 
as yours. 

As you say, we have both taken a very real interest 
in the capital city and I for my part derive very special 
pleasure from your tribute to Her Excellency’s work in 
India. You have in New Delhi a permanent anti-Tuberculosis Clinic started as the result of her great appeal. The initiative she took has led to a considerable 
measure of solid achievement in this vital field and I can 
testify to the many hours of hard labour and thought that 
she has devoted to this and other good causes. 

The interrupted schemes for developing further the 
amenities of the capital were dear to both of us and we 
shall hope, after the war, to read of their completion. At 
present you fully recognise, it is out of the question to 
go ahead with any building projects unless they are immediate necessities, and usually they must be connected with the war effort. It is however gratifying to think that 
the anti-malaria scheme, thanks to the devoted efforts of 
an expert band of workers, has been so very successful 
and has become a model for the whole world. It is good 
of you to recognise my own share in the inception and 
carrying through of this great scheme for which many 
thousands have daily (and nightly) reason to be thankful. 

Your municipality quite properly expects to be able 
to look to the Government of India and ultimately to the 
Viceroy himself for special interest and encouragement. 
So you will I know share my own deep satisfaction that I 
should be handing over this office to a successor of such 
exceptional distinction and well-proved wisdom as Lord 
Wavell. The burden on the Viceroy was always heavy 
and the war has made it doubly so. But I know Lord 
Wavell, and I feel very confident that in his assistance to 
you over the affairs of New Delhi as in the wider sphere 
he will demonstrate most conclusively that His Majesty 
the King-Emperor could not have made a sounder choice 
of Viceroy. I am glad also to think too that you will have 
a friend at Court in the new Private Secretary whom I 
appointed as Chief Commissioner of Delhi and who is 
exceptionally well aware of your needs and of your 
difficulties. 

You express anxiety about the removal after the war 
of the many temporary buildings which must be admitted 
to mar the beauty of the city. As I announced in my 
recent speech to the houses of the legislature it is the 
definite policy of the Government of India to remove 
those buildings as soon as possible. It is the intention 
that all the temporary buildings that have been constructed 
for use as offices and hostels, in the neighbourhood of 
the Secretariat in the Irwin Stadium, near the Willingdon 
aerodrome, in the neighbourhood of Connaught Circus 
and in various blocks, which, under the New Delhi Development Scheme, had been allotted for other purposes 
will be removed as soon as possible after the cessation 
of hostilities. That removal will be a welcome sign of the 
outright victory which we all intend to win. When the 
day of victory dawns and the enemies of man's progress 
are humbled and cast down, we shall all look forward, and 
I think with good reason, to a brilliant future for this 
city. Resources will be available for undertaking a great 
effort to raise the standard of living throughout India's 
territories, and New Delhi will certainly gain at least 
indirect benefit : while additional advantage will accrue 
from the development of air travel for which this seems
likely to be an important nodal point. 

Her Excellency and I will watch your progress with 
intense and personal interest. We thank you again most 
warmly for coming to bid us farewell and for the very 
generous terms of your address. We wish you all good 
fortune and success. 


Goodbye to you all. 

