
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE TALUKDARS OF OUDH
Speaker: Lord Curzon
Audience: Talukdars of Awadh 
Date: 10 January 1899
Location: Kolkata
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is described in the book.
Additional Audiences: The Maharaja of Ayodhya

Speech: 

Maharaja of Ajudhya and Gentlemen, Talukdars of 
Oudh,— It was within my knowledge before I landed in India 
that among the agreeable duties awaiting a new Viceroy 
upon his first taking up the reins of office, is that of receiving a deputation from the Talukdars of Oudh. That body, conspicuous for its representative and influential character, 
is always among the first to welcome the Representative of 
Her Majesty the Queen-Empress, and your appearance here 
to-day is an indication that your attitude remains unaltered, 
and that, in commencing my administration, I shall receive 
at your hands the same support which you have consistently 
accorded to my predecessors. 

My studies of Indian history have rendered me fairly 
familiar with the history of your body, from the time when 
your relations with the British Government were re-adjusted 
by the skill and impartiality of Lord Canning, down to the 
legislation of more recent years. Throughout this period 
the Talukdars of Oudh have been animated by the same 
spirit of loyalty and of good sense, which I think it is no 
exaggeration to say has now assumed almost the fixity of a 
tradition. 

The work of internal administration is, as you justly remind 
me, one that applies as searching a test to the capacities of 
statesmanship as the more dramatic issues involved in external 
policy. There is no standing still in the growth of nations ; 
and the adaptation of the conditions and environment of life 
to the increasing stature of a people is a task that calls both 
for vigilance and foresight. I hope to devote much, of my 
time and energies to this task, the importance of which is 
measurable by the enormous numbers of those whose welfare 
it affects in the crowded but often obscure by-ways of 
industry and toil. 

I am grateful to you for having included Lady Curzon in 
the welcome which you have extended to myself. 