
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Lansdowne
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 4 December 1888
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. President and Members of the Chamber of Commerce of Bombay,— The good will which the Chamber of 
Commerce has kindly expressed towards me possesses the 
greatest value in my eyes, and I thank you heartily for the 
courtesy which you have shown me. It is, I can assure 
you, with the utmost satisfaction that I have learnt from 
you, Sir, that my selection for the high office, which I am 
about to undertake, commends itself to the mercantile 
community of Bombay. No one is more ready than I am 
to recognise the high importance of the interests committed to your care — interests in which, not only India is concerned, but which are indissolubly bound up with those of 
the commerce of Great Britain, which is bound more 
closely by commercial ties to your city than to any other 
in this continent. I am fully prepared to admit the advantages which may be derived by those who are connected with the Government of India, from the existence 
of bodies such as yours, the authorised exponents of the 
views of the commercial community, and you will, I can 
assure you, always find me ready to avail myself of your 
good offices in dealing with that class of political questions 
which most closely affects you. Upon the present occasion you will, I feel sure, excuse me if I do not enter at length into a discussion of the particular points to which 
you have referred me, not because these are not matters 
which I should be glad to discuss with you. I suppose, 
indeed, that every new Viceroy arrives in India with 
ideas of his own in regard to the great task which lies 
before him, and the policy by which he would like to 
be guided during his administration in dealing with questions, such as those which you have raised. There is, however, one conviction which should, I cannot help 
thinking, prevail with him at such a moment — the conviction that any ideas with regard to Indian matters formed at a distance, and of necessity without that full knowledge 
which can be acquired only upon the spot, are almost sure 
to be modified by subsequent experience of men and 
things derived in the country, and from direct contact 
with persons having an intimate knowledge of it to which he cannot pretend. For this reason ordinary caution as regards himself, as well as the respect which he owes to 
his future colleagues and advisers, demand of him that he 
should be slow at the very outset of his career to give premature public utterance to his thoughts in regard to the affairs of your country ; and you, on your side, will be slow 
to find fault with him, if he exercises what I fancy most 
people will look upon as a judicious reserve in speaking 
about them. I shall, however, not fail to take note of 
what you have said in regard to the importance of continuing to develop the Railway system of India, both as a means of increasing the material resources of the country, 
and in order to diminish the risk to which it is liable from 
those periods of scarcity to which it has been from time to 
time exposed. I may mention that, on the eve of my 
departure, this view was strongly pressed upon me by an 
influential deputation from the Chamber of Commerce of 
Manchester — a city with which you are so closely connected. I feel with you, however, that at the present time all proposals involving an increase of the public expenditure 
require the closest examination and scrutiny. There is 
nevertheless, I am convinced, no duty more incumbent 
upon your Government than that of extending the Railway communications of the country, and of bringing to 
light, and rendering available for human use, the wealth 
which is latent within it. Nor is there, I believe, any 
chapter of Indian history to which we have a right to 
recur with greater satisfaction than that which records our 
past achievements in this direction — achievements, the 
progress of which will, I trust, not be arrested during my 
connection with your Government. I thank you once more 
for the manner in which you have addressed me, and I 
trust to be able, during my term of office, to recur to you 
from time to time for assistance and advice. 
