
Title: DINNER AT THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Elgin
Audience: Bengal Chamber of Commerce
Date: 2 January 1899
Location: Kolkata
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being responded to is in the book. 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

I thank you with all my heart for your very great kindness to me this evening. You have removed a suspicion which sometimes crossed my mind, the suspicion that some 
of you really thought that my regard for Calcutta was not 
all that it might be. I have nothing to withdraw from 
what I have said elsewhere of the affection I, for many 
reasons, personally feel for Simla, or of the advantages on 
public grounds of a move to that place. Nor of course 
do I deny to others the right to differ from me, so long as 
the arguments they use are fair arguments. There is one 
line of argument which I consider unfair, and that is to 
dilate on the practice of former days and to impute to the 
men of to-day a less strict sense of duty. Improvements 
in the means of communication, which have brought India 
nearer to England, have brought Simla nearer to Calcutta 
for all purposes of business, and it is as reasonable to 
overlook that fact as it would be to ignore the existence 
of the Suez Canal and to insist on calculations based on a 
voyage round the Cape in a sailing ship. I apologise for 
detaining you on this subject, but facts which are patent 
to you who know India are not equally appreciated elsewhere, and I think it worth while to say distinctly that there is no foundation for the allegation that public business suffers owing to the move of the Government from Calcutta. I hesitate to argue further the charge of dereliction of duty. I cannot conceive any officer of the Government of India, be he- Viceroy or any one else, 
who would, for a moment, allow considerations of mere 
pleasure or comfort to determine his place of residence. 
I decline to accept for my Colleagues or myself any lower 
standard in such matters than that which regulated the 
conduct of our predecessors. 

But, Gentlemen, I am encouraged by your reception of 
me this evening to assure you that my regard for Calcutta 
is no empty thing. I shall ever be proud of having been 
a member of a Government whose orders have issued 
under the time-honoured phrase from "Fort William in 
Bengal.” I hold as strongly as any of you that it is here 
in Calcutta that the important legislative work of the 
Government of India should be done. It is permissible 
to remind you that it has not been found convenient at all 
times and in all countries to hold the sittings of the 
Legislative Assembly in a large and populous city. We 
have the historic decision of the authors of the Constitution of the United States, and more recently the removal of the French Assemblies from Paris to Versailles. I 
myself was born in the midst of scenes of tumult of which 
the immediate result was the burning of the Houses 
of Parliament in Montreal and the ultimate result the 
establishment of the Dominion Parliament at Ottawa. I 
do not mention these things to suggest that the Legislative Council of the Governor General should sit at Barrackpore or anywhere else. I have witnessed periods of some 
excitement in Calcutta— and periods of excitement are 
not conducive to the satisfactory discharge of Legislative 
duties— but I should be ungrateful if in this assembly I 
did not remember the valuable assistance and moderating 
influence of my two friends who during the last five years 
have represented the Bengal Chamber of Commerce, Sir 
Patrick Playfair and Mr. Allan Arthur. For close on a 
hundred years the proposals for the amendment of the 
laws of the people of India have been discussed and 
approved in the place where we now meet for that purpose, and I hope that when your successors meet a 
hundred years hence to speed the parting Viceroy of the 
day, he will declare then as emphatically as I do now for 
the retention by Calcutta of its position and precedence in 
this respect among the cities of the Empire of India. 

Gentlemen, there are difficulties of a rather formidable 
character which confront me in addressing you this evening. You, Sir, have been good enough to speak of the circumstances of the last five years as exceptional. I am 
scarcely the person to make comparisons in such matters,
but I cannot deny that our hands have been pretty full. 
I am inclined to think that if I had been able in the latter 
part of 1893 to take a peep into the future, I might well 
have hesitated, even more than I did hesitate, to accept 
a certain proposition that was then made to me, and that 
no one would have ventured to term my hesitation other 
than prudent and even patriotic. But if during these 
years we have had our full share of great events, and if 
we have surmounted more than one crisis in our affairs 
that does not make my task at this moment the easier. 
Great events can scarcely be described in a few words, 
and I have a rooted objection to long speeches after 
dinner, especially to my own. Under these circumstances 
one of two things usually happens. The speaker is told 
either that he has treated everything in a sketchy and 
imperfect manner, or that he has neglected subjects of 
equal or greater importance than those on which he has 
discoursed. Moreover, great events and times of crisis 
too often mean controversies which survive though they
may lie dormant. My distinguished friend, the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal, the other day in a speech, the too flattering kindness of which I gratefully acknowledge 
challenged me to soar into the empyrean. The idea of the 
lark carolling in the blue vault of heaven is an attractive 
one, but I am not quite sure what happens to the lark 
when the clouds are charged with electricity. Possibly 
my Hon'ble friend knows ; and as I have always regarded 
him as a model of prudence, I am strongly disposed to 
follow his example. But, speaking seriously, I can only 
touch upon matters which are controversial with great 
reserve. It is true that in a day or two I shall myself 
arrive at a region of greater freedom and less responsibility, but I should think very poorly of myself if I allowed that fact to alter my estimate of what is expedient in the 
public service. I conceive it to be a positive duty not to 
say a word if I can avoid it that will render more difficult 
the task of my Colleagues whom I leave behind or my 
successor who is rapidly approaching Calcutta, and I am 
sure that you, Gentlemen, will feel with me that no other 
course would be consistent with a spirit of loyalty to the 
Government of India. 

Let us pass from the general to the particular. I 
suppose there is no branch of the work of the Government of India on which there would be more to say than 
that in which gentlemen round this table are specially 
interested: I mean the work of the Department of 
Finance and Commerce. Finance at the best of times 
enters into everything which we do : in times of calamity 
it has to receive our first care, and the consideration of 
its problems goes far to determine our action. War, 
famine, plague, earthquake, internal administration, 
foreign policy all raise questions of ways and means. In 
all these forms questions of finance have claimed our 
attention during the last five years ; and I venture to say 
that never have its difficulties been more courageously 
and skilfully met than by my Hon’ble friend who, to the 
great advantage of the Government of India and of myself 
in particular, has throughout held the post of our adviser. 

Now I tremble to think how many apples of discord I 
could throw upon this festive board if I embarked upon a 
discussion of our financial troubles. A history which 
began with Import Duties and ended with Currency Reform 
must be long and must be controversial, and I have promised to avoid both evils as much as possible. On the main issues in the great question of the day my lips of 
course are sealed. It is not for me, or for the Government of India, to interpose while the investigations of the Committee whose assistance they invited are proceeding. 
But it may be permissible for me to offer one or two 
remarks as to the position of the Government of India. 
The determination of what is and is not practicable in 
the higher regions of finance to remove the evils of which 
we in India complain depends on two separate and distinct factors, i.e., on the one hand the conditions prevailing in India, on the other the conditions prevailing in 
London, — and I say London as representing the money 
market of the world. That this distinction is a real one 
must, I think, be admitted when we find that even so 
great an expert as Lord Rothschild insists again and again 
in his evidence before the Committee that he does not 
know India, and therefore cannot pretend to say whether 
the course which he recommends is practicable in India. 
Now the constitution of the Government of India is in 
some respects well fitted to cope with a difficulty of 
this character. It provides, as you know, for consultation between the Secretary of State and his advisers 
on the one hand, and the Viceroy and his advisers 
on the other, and important decisions are, as a rule, 
the outcome of that consultation. But in this case 
the ordinary procedure could not be followed. That was 
due to a variety of circumstances; partly I think to the 
impatience — I quite admit the not unnatural impatience— 
of gentlemen, some of whom I imagine are present in this 
room, who were keenly alive to the difficulties of trade. 
It was necessary for us to state the case for India in 
our Despatches of September 16th, 1897, and March 3rd, 
1898, on our own responsibility and on the information 
available to us. I do not mean by this to limit our 
responsibility or to imply that I am dissatisfied with the 
results these two Despatches have already achieved. On 
the contrary, I maintain that our proposals are based on 
sound principles, and that the support given to those 
principles has increased in a very remarkable manner 
since the summer of 1897. I claim that our endeavour to 
initiate a discussion on right lines has been distinctly 
successful. But I also claim an opportunity for completing the process of consultation. It has been thought advisable to submit the whole case to an independent and 
impartial tribunal at what under other circumstances 
might have been a preliminary stage. I concurred, and 
still concur, in the adoption of this course ; and it is only 
when, by this means, we have secured full information as 
regards English opinion, and the best advice available in 
the financial capital of the world, that I could make myself 
responsible for final proposals. This duty will not now be 
mine, but I cannot suppose that the Government of India, 
however constituted, will take any other view of its duty 
or responsibility. 

Indian financiers must always be prepared for the 
unexpected, as the events of the last five years have 
abundantly proved. It is therefore obviously desirable in 
Government interest that any cause which tends to accentuate these difficulties should be removed, and fluctuation of exchange is clearly one of those causes. But it is 
altogether unfair and untrue to say, as some have said, 
that the Government of India have thought of nothing 
else. In our Despatch of September 1897, which, as  I have already indicated, must be read as preliminary 
to the definite proposals of March last, we discussed at 
some length the general situation. I do not ask you to 
endorse our arguments, but whether we are right or 
wrong I should have thought even the most hostile critic, 
if he took the trouble to read our despatch, would be 
forced to admit that we acted as we supposed in the 
interest of trade. It has also been alleged that Government has done nothing to assist trade, but, on the contrary, keeps in its own hands funds which might be used to 
overcome difficulties, I can say distinctly that in the 
management of its balances the Government has certainly 
never taken any steps to create in the market a condition of 
stringency, and does not hold the view that it has anything 
to gain by making such a condition ; and that it has given 
earnest of this opinion by twice, during the last two years, 
obtaining the aid of the Legislature in making the Currency 
Reserve available for the purpose of relieving existing 
stringency. Further than this it would be unprofitable 
for me to discuss so technical a question this evening. 
I believe it to be one where there are practical difficulties 
which it has so far been impossible to remove. 

In my humble judgment a stable exchange is at least 
as much to be desired in the interest of trade as in the 
interest of Government. Government may be put to serious inconvenience in finding the extra number of rupees necessitated by an adverse exchange. It is true that 
within certain limits Government is master of its own expenditure, and that economies, troublesome and even possibly uneconomical in the long run, but still, up to a certain 
point, means of avoiding present expenditure, can be enforced ; but it must be remembered that if economies are pushed too far Government itself will come to a standstill 
and the objects for which all Governments exist will not be 
attained. Trade on the other hand cannot exist without capital, and capital will only come on its own terms. Instances perhaps might be adduced of countries where, 
although the value of money was not assured, there was 
yet no lack of capital. I take it in this matter, as in most 
other things, we can get what we want if we are ready to 
pay for it, and men will take speculative risks if they see 
their way to a big enough profit. But to my mind for an 
undeveloped country to attract capital in this manner can 
only be compared to the conduct of the spendthrift who 
raises money on his expectations. I do not think India can 
afford to pay so high a price, or that there is any reason 
why it should be demanded of her. India has most of the 
advantages which are calculated to inspire the capitalist 
with confidence. It has labour cheap and abundant, 
resources awaiting development and every year becoming 
more accessible. It has above all, the protection of a 
great Empire pledged to the security of life and property 
at home and abroad. Why should not English capital 
feel attracted by these opportunities and as safe here as 
in other parts of the Empire? I am firmly persuaded that 
with a stable exchange and the confidence which will 
accompany it the time would soon come, to the material 
advantage of India, which requires cheap capital, and of 
England, where there are superabundant funds waiting for 
profitable employment. 

As I have said, I do not consider myself at liberty to 
discuss the manner in which this end can be attained. 
But I may without indiscretion draw attention to a fact 
which I think is of good omen, and that is the great 
steadiness of exchange during the present year. In the 
four years preceding the present year exchange has 
varied to the extent of 11 or 12 per cent. In the current 
year its variations have been limited to 3 per cent. ; and for 
a good many months now we have seen the unaccustomed 
phenomenon of exchange quotations hardly moving from 
day to day, and almost or quite reaching the goal of 
sixteen pence. We have been accustomed to hear, from 
certain sections of the community, whose views I would 
wish to treat with all respect, though speaking frankly as 
I am sure you all would wish me to do — we have heard 
from them grave apprehensions of the results to Indian 
trade that would follow from the raising of exchange to 
this point. So far, Gentlemen, I am happy to say that 
those fatal results do not appear to have ensued. I do 
not mean to say that during the period of transition there 
have not been times when trade has been seriously hampered ; but at the present time the productive powers of this country are showing a marvellous capacity for recovery after the adverse seasons that affected them ; and the figures of our export trade show that the rise and 
steadiness of exchange has not placed an embargo upon 
the sale of those products to our customers in other parts 
of the world. Indeed for my own part, when I see that 
three quarters of the whole foreign trade of India is with 
countries using a gold standard, I find it difficult to believe 
that, so far as our external trade is concerned, we can reap 
anything but a large balance of advantage from throwing 
in our lot with them, rather than with the silver countries 
with which we exchange the remaining quarter of our 
trade. 

There is one feature in Indian Finance which I think 
must strike any one who is in any degree responsible for 
it, and that is the inexpediency, I might almost say the 
impossibility, of making any material increase to the 
burdens laid upon the people. Certainly it has come 
home to me with great force during my term of office. It 
was no slight shock to one who had been, and still is, a 
firm believer in Free Trade, to find that the very first 
large question which awaited him was the imposition of 
import duties. It was a necessity which I deplored, and 
of which the best that can be said is that there was no 
practicable alternative at the time, and that the very 
gloomy predictions of the effect on Indian trade have 
not all been realised. Now, again, in view of certain 
suggested remedies for our troubles, the same consideration rises up before me, and I have no hesitation in declaring, and I believe I shall have the unanimous support of 
responsible men in India, that we cannot hope to escape 
by the gate which leads to increased taxation. In saying 
this I do not subscribe to all that has been alleged of the 
poverty of India, and the poverty of its inhabitants. I 
confess that I habitually distrust generalisations, and, 
after all, poverty and wealth are relative terms. To turn 
the earnings of a coolie into shillings and pence and 
present them before the astonished gaze of a British 
artisan is to encourage a Pharisaic spirit in the latter, 
but it really proves nothing. To institute a just comparison we must know all about their respective habits, clothing, food, national customs, climate, and the many 
other things that contribute to a man’s welfare and happiness. I do not believe that the great mass of the people think themselves impoverished. If their income is small, 
it suffices for their simple wants ; they cannot be plundered as in former times, and they know well now that in bad seasons assistance will be brought to them. I wish 
with all my heart that we could do more, I cannot 
suppose that any one who considers the matter seriously 
can fail to recognise the great claims that our fellow-subjects in India — I refer especially to the great agricultural population — have on our sympathy and regard. I 
can never forget what I have heard and seen of their 
cheerfulness in a lot which has many hardships and few 
pleasures, of their fortitude under adversity, of their 
ready response to kindness, of their reasonableness and 
trustfulness when sympathetically led, I am not speaking 
at random ; for to my mind the great Famine Camps and 
works of our year of trial carried through without coercion, without so far as I know any addition to the ordinary police of the districts, presented a sight that few countries 
could have shown. It justifies us in the hope that even 
in the more delicate operations connected with Plague we 
may successfully invite the co-operation of the people if 
we can once convince them that we are working for their 
benefit. All these things the Government of India must 
ever bear in mind while working steadily, though of 
necessity slowly, towards the end of all good government, 
a greater freedom from distress, a higher scale of comfort 
for all classes under its charge. 

Sir, there is one part of work of the Government which 
leads more directly than any other to an increase both in 
the prosperity of the people and in the revenue of the 
country — I mean the construction of protective and productive works. They are commonly divided under two 
great heads — Railways and Irrigation ; but that does not 
imply any preference in treatment. We spend more 
upon railways than upon irrigation, because more can 
with advantage be spent. But I deny that we starve the 
irrigation branch or discourage irrigation schemes. The 
progress made on the side of irrigation is systematic and 
steady, and that is the proper way to carry on a business 
of this kind. For it is a mistake to suppose that irrigation 
can ever become a universal remedy and cause failure of 
crops to be unknown throughout the land. We cannot 
take more water out of our sources of supply than they 
contain, and we cannot usefully apply it to the land 
except where the conditions are favourable. I have just 
comeback from Burma, a country where there is abundance of water, but across which as you know there runs 
a dry zone. I halted at a place where the year's rainfall 
was reported to be under in inches. I naturally enquired, 
as I stood on the banks of the mighty Irrawaddy, into the 
prospects of irrigation ; but it was pointed out to me that 
water could not be made to run up hills as well as down, and the surface of the country alongside the river being undulating and cut up by great ravines, irrigation works 
on an extended scale were practically out of the 
question. Again, elsewhere there is the danger of the 
country becoming waterlogged to the detriment of 
its fertility and of the health of its inhabitants. Where, 
however, conditions are favourable, works are in progress 
or are being prepared to take their turn. For example, in 
Burma, the Mandalay Canal will be complete next year 
and will be followed by the Shwebo Canal. In the Punjab 
the great Chenab Canal is approaching completion, the 
Jhelum Canal is about to be commenced, and the scheme 
for Sind-Sagar is in preparation. Large irrigation 
schemes mean large colonisation schemes, and for this and 
other administrative reasons it would be unwise to push 
on all these works at the same time. Otherwise there is 
every inducement to do so, for they are all likely to prove 
exceedingly profitable. I maintain that there is no justification for accusing the Government of India of want of attention to this important subject, and it is fair to add 
that it is not overlooked in Native States. For instance, 
when I visited Jeypore, I was told that no fewer than 138 
irrigation works, large and small, were completed or in 
progress in that State, 

Turning now to the question of railways, I have first 
to congratulate my friend the Lieutenant-Governor on the 
flight which in this case he did not decline. He dealt in 
an attractive manner with several matters of interest. 
But for me there are dangers ahead if I embark on an 
examination of particular schemes, and much as I should 
like to offer you my opinion for what it is worth on some 
questions which concern you closely, I am confirmed in 
my resolution to resist the temptation. On the general 
question I have seen considerable changes of opinion 
during my term of office. I have myself been both commended and condemned as a railway enthusiast. I have 
been praised for an ambition to surpass all records : I 
have been blamed for an excess of zeal in adhering to a 
programme. I plead guilty to neither count of the 
indictment. I have said before and I repeat that so far 
as I am responsible in arranging for an extension of railway construction, I acted in full accord with two 
Secretaries of State in two Governments, and of course 
with my two Hon’ble Colleagues, Sir Charles Pritchard 
and Sir Arthur Trevor, who have had charge of the Public 
Works Department. I hold that our programme was a 
reasonable one in the circumstances of the time when it 
was framed, and I see nothing even yet to regret in it. 
We have not been able to pay for it in the way in which 
we intended, but no one will venture to say that the causes 
which prevented this could have been foreseen, or that 
the work done is not a valuable investment for the future. 
So again, as regards modifications to meet the altered 
circumstances. There was no hesitation on our part in 
ordering reductions, but it must be remembered that here 
we could not deal with the whole programme. It was 
obviously impossible to reduce the expenditure of such 
Companies as raised their own capital further than the 
Companies themselves were willing to reduce, but I can 
safely say that so soon as it became necessary every item 
was carefully considered and wherever possible expenditure was restricted. 

No, Gentlemen, I am not prepared to accept the name 
of railway enthusiast. I am a believer in railways especially 
in India, and I will give some of my reasons in a moment ; 
but I consider that the greatest improvement achieved 
during my term of office has been the institution of the 
system under which schemes are approved and sanctioned 
with the express object of avoiding hasty and rash decisions, and yet of giving a definite reply to all applications within a reasonable time. The Railway Conference, as 
it has been called, enables the Government of India once 
every year to take stock of its position, to compare the 
merits and drawbacks of the schemes,- numbered not by 
units or tens, but, I may almost say, by hundreds, which 
are placed before it, and to make a selection among them 
with due regard to financial possibilities and to the needs 
of various parts of the country. In no other way can we 
do justice to the more pressing claims so long as we have 
to work within prescribed limits ; and so long as Government incurs responsibilities I quite agree that limits must be prescribed, whether extended as they were three 
years ago, or restricted as I am now told is necessary. 
It is sometimes said that we ought to depend more on 
private enterprise. I hope the time will come when that 
may be practicable, but I am afraid we must be content 
to wait until capital comes out to us in the manner of 
which I have spoken. It is said, and you, Sir, have 
endorsed the complaint, that we do not offer sufficient 
inducements. I should like to know what that means 
except that Government must take upon itself a larger 
share of the risk. We are exceedingly anxious to 
encourage private enterprise, and we have always had in 
the summaries of the results of our conferences a heading 
for railways "to be constructed without assistance from 
Government,” but I am afraid the number of the entries 
is not encouraging. As things stand we do, by the terms 
we offer, take what we consider an ample share of the 
risk, and I do not see how we can be asked to offer terms 
which would mean that we were raising money at distinctly higher rates than those at which we could ourselves borrow. Up to the rate at which it can borrow, a State 
may, if it so pleases, directly or indirectly, guarantee those 
who construct a public work like a railway against loss. 
But beyond that point the question ceases to be one of 
possible loss, and becomes one of probable profit. The 
division of profits and the division of risk then become correlative terms. There is very little enterprise in the man who is content with the sweet simplicity of a Government annuity, but there are any number of grades of enterprise in the sharing of risks up to that most enterprising 
but often most far-sighted individual who makes his railway “ without assistance from Government ” and justly claims the profits which accrue therefrom. I see no reason 
why Government should not be abundantly liberal when it 
deals with bona fide enterprise of this character subject to 
one condition. It must not be open to the promoter to go 
back upon his bargain. Cases have occurred of projects 
started as purely private enterprises where subsequently 
Government has been subjected to pressure and compelled 
to give a guarantee. It ought to be clearly understood 
from the beginning that no such alteration of terms can be 
entertained. 

I am a believer in the extension of railways in India, in 
the first place because for a long time to come there will 
be no difficulty in selecting schemes that will pay. One 
of the last pressed upon me offered a trifle of 12 to 15 
per cent. I do not say they are all like that, but a much 
lower figure would justify the investment. And in the 
second place the direct return on the capital expended in 
the railway is by no means the whole of the benefit which 
accrues to Government. I have spoken of the difficulty 
of increasing taxation. But we have one great progressive head of revenue, i.e., land revenue. Land revenue as you know does not increase automatically or capriciously. The revision takes place at fixed periods and the increase is determined after an examination of the 
whole circumstances of the district, which for care and 
precision and for consideration of the interests of the 
cultivator is unrivalled, and is to my mind one of the most 
remarkable parts of the Indian administrative system. It 
does not require much argument to show that if a cultivator can sell his produce at rates of 10, 15, 20 seers the rupee where formerly they stood at 30, 35, 40, the share 
that falls to Government can be legitimately increased, 
not only without undue burden to the cultivator, but on 
the contrary leaving him a considerable additional profit. Therefore it seems to me that the direct return from the traffic on a railway is often the smallest part of the 
benefit derived from its construction. Government benefits by this important branch of its revenue becoming steadily progressive without increasing the incidence 
of taxation. The cultivator benefits by the increased 
price of his produce, and the country as a whole benefits 
by the possession of larger stores on which it can indent 
in time of emergency. I said I would not draw comparisons between railway and irrigation works, and I do 
not do so when I claim as one of the facts proved beyond 
the shadow of doubt in 1896-97, that India could rely on 
her stocks of grain in a manner never before practicable, 
and in a manner which contributed above everything else 
to the triumph over famine ; and all this India owed to 
her railways. 

One word more as to my own position in this matter 
of railways. Whether the programme I have supported 
was or was not justified, I think I can fairly claim that 
the resources of the country have not been expended on 
ambitious projects. There are many ambitious projects 
both in this part of the country and elsewhere, some of 
which may some day prove attractive ; of some of which 
I altogether doubt the expediency. In my time only one 
great through railway has been authorised, and I regret 
that it is not yet so near completion as I had once hoped — I mean the lines which complete the system of the East Coast Railway and bring the Bengal and Nagpur 
Railway into Calcutta. I venture to hope that when they 
are finished great and lasting advantages will accrue to 
this city. But in other respects our work has consisted 
for the most part of supplementing the great systems which already exist, and I believe that for a considerable time to come there is plenty of work of this kind to be done. 
It is not for me to prescribe the policy of the future, but 
at any rate I leave behind me no embarrassing obligations 
which need divert to what I may call the luxuries of 
railway enterprise, the money and energy which may be 
used for widening the foundation on which is built up the 
success which our Indian railways have already achieved.

Gentlemen, I have already made large demands upon 
your patience, and yet if I went on to dilate on the various 
events of the last five years which have affected the peace 
and tranquillity of the country internally and externally 
I might easily detain you an equally long time. With 
social conditions such as prevail in India we must always 
be on the look out for disturbances of the peace in times 
of strong religious or political excitement, and in times 
of distress or suffering. We have had seasons of 
trouble, and consequently we have had our experience of 
periods of anxiety. It is the business of the Government 
as custodians of internal peace to be ever ready to avert 
disorder by timely precautions, by friendly and conciliatory counsels, by remedial measures, while at the same time prepared if need be to vindicate authority by a just 
and impartial but stern and unflinching administration of 
the law. I am not sure if it is always recognised how 
much each individual can do to assist Government in this 
matter. If there is one thing on which the evidence is 
unanimous it is the widespread gratitude which the 
Famine Charitable Fund evoked. I am inclined to trace 
to it some at least of the better feeling which looking 
back to 1894 I seem to discover in 1898. I hope I shall 
not be misunderstood if I remind my countrymen in India 
that even if we think our fellow-subjects here may 
entertain prejudices which are unfounded, or aspirations 
which are premature, it is possible to avoid the irritating 
word, the expression of contempt, which, often I believe 
wholly unintentionally, serves as the match which fires the 
train. 

Elsewhere than on the North-Western Frontier — I 
admit that is a very large exception— we have not had 
much to disturb peaceful relations outside the borders of 
British India, though we have on several occasions been 
called upon to send troops to Africa where they have 
fully maintained the credit of the Indian Army. Of the 
troubles on the Punjab frontier I cannot within the limits 
I have prescribed for myself speak at any length. I have 
endeavoured more than once to describe my position in 
general terms. I have seen no reason to depart from it, 
and I need scarcely weary you by repeating it. There 
are special points on which in justice to others as well 
as to myself I should be glad to say something, but I 
consider it a positive duty to abstain. It is impossible to 
treat of the causes of these outbreaks, of the history of 
what has occurred, or of the prospects for the future, without touching upon matters where there is, or has been, great difference of opinion and strong feeling. To one 
who was dealing with subjects such as these the warning 
was addressed incedis per ignes suppositos cineri doloso. I have no wish to rekindle the hidden fires. Time the great healer has already hoI pe done something to 
soften asperities, but an incautious word might easily 
renew controversies of which probably the most that can 
be said is that they are dormant. Never in my judgment 
would it be more unpardonable than now to speak that 
incautious word. My successor is now in India on his 
journey to this place, where he will soon be installed in 
office. He is a man, as you all know, not only of great 
natural ability, but of indefatigable energy and industry, 
who in a comparatively short time has won for himself 
as politician, as traveller, and as author, a place of which 
any man would be proud. He comes, as he has himself 
told us, to devote himself to the service of India from a 
deep interest in the work and in the people he is to 
govern. All these things are of happy augury, and I for 
one shall look forward with keen expectation to the realisation of the best hopes from Lord Curzon's career in India. But probably no one knows so well the magnitude of the task he has undertaken as his predecessor. In many aspects it might well seem overwhelming, in 
none is it so full of constant anxiety as in our relations 
with the tribes on our borders. I often think that we 
are hypercritical in our examination of the circumstances 
and motives of these tribes. The fact is that they 
are wayward and wild, ignorant and excitable, and any 
cause — I might almost say no cause at all — is sufficient 
to impel them to action which, however desperate and 
suicidal, may nevertheless stir up a conflagration as' 
effectively as any fiery cross and involve the Government 
of India in the most serious political difficulties. I do 
not myself believe that we can by any means available 
to us altogether prevent the occurrence of outbreaks, 
sudden, unforeseen, almost unaccountable. All that can 
be done is to make such arrangements as will minimise 
the dangers, and knowing full well the constant anxieties 
which thus fall upon the Viceroy, I have throughout been 
desirous that nothing should be said or done to prevent 
his using the means which after deliberation he considers will best serve his purpose. With him is the responsibility, with him will rightly remain the determining 
voice in the choice of men and measures, and I venture to 
bespeak for him the confidence and loyalty of all. 

Gentlemen, it is I suppose impossible on the eve of a 
departure such as this not to listen to the echoes of the 
days of one’s sojourn in the country. I fancy I hear the 
oft-told tale of a subservience I never professed, founded 
on a phrase I never used. I fancy I see pictured before 
me Secretaries who beguile, Generals who dominate, 
perhaps even the figure of a Finance Member who controls. I remember as one of my early regrets that I 
did not soon enough begin to count the occasions on 
which I was informed that resignation was my obvious 
duty. But these, believe me, are shadows, fleeting and 
transitory, at most misconceptions which I hope never 
disturbed my good humour. In their place come words 
of appreciative kindness uttered in many languages, never 
more welcome than those which you, Sir, have uttered 
this evening, and which this company has endorsed in a 
manner which neither Lady Elgin nor I can ever forget. 
In stronger relief stands out the record deeply engraven 
on my memory of work which has claimed and obtained 
the support, loyally and ungrudgingly given, of men of 
every race and class in this great Empire. And through 
everything, above everything, rises the all-pervading 
sense of the personality, if I may use the expression, of 
the multitudes whose welfare has been entrusted to me, 
but is now to be committed to another, and of the great 
task in which it has been my privilege to share. How I 
have acquitted myself therein I cannot tell, but the wish 
of my heart I know. It so happened that the first place, 
outside Calcutta, which I visited as Viceroy was the 
historic city of Lucknow. There lies buried one of the 
noblest of Anglo-Indian heroes, Henry Lawrence, and 
standing in the quiet cemetery amidst the ruins of the 
Residency, telling us more eloquently than words of the 
peace which succeeds strife, of the rest which is the best 
reward of arduous and loyal service, I read the well-known epitaph of the man “who tried to do his duty." 
Often and often in the days since has that simple tombstone and its lesson recurred to me in the hour of doubt and trial and misrepresentation, and has reminded me 
of the spirit in which work has been done in India and 
for India, and of the path which those who desire to serve 
her must strive to follow cheerfully, unhesitatingly to the 
end. 

