
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE CORPORATION OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Ripon
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 2 June 1880
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Corporation of 
Bombay,— I am very grateful to you for the address which 
you have just been good enough to deliver. I have observed with great satisfaction the assurances which you give in that address of your loyalty and devotion to the 
Queen-Empress of India; but I can assure you that it is 
altogether unnecessary that you should give those assurances to me in words. I am very well aware of the feelings of loyalty and devotion to our Gracious Sovereign by which 
you are actuated—loyalty and devotion which is due, indeed, 
to the royal lady who has always taken, as you are all well 
aware, a very deep interest in all that concerns the welfare of her Indian subjects. (Applause.) For myself, gentlemen, I can assure you that I am deeply sensible of the 
great responsibility which devolves upon me in respect to 
the great office which Her Majesty has been pleased to 
entrust to me. We are told that it does not become him 
who putteth on his armour to boast himself as the man 
who takes it off; and therefore I am not at all inclined 
upon this occasion to make to you, and, through you, to 
the community of India, any large promises, or to lay 
before you any extensive programme. I should prefer 
that your judgment should be pronounced, as I am sure it 
will be, intelligently and fairly upon my conduct when you 
have been able to judge of me by my acts. (Applause.) 
I will only say this,—that it will be my constant endeavour 
to devote earnestly and assiduously any powers which I 
may possess, faithfully to discharge my duty to my 
Sovereign and to the people of India. (Applause.) You, 
gentlemen, have alluded to that grievous affliction of famine 
which during recent years has from time to time been productive of so great suffering and misery to many portions of the population of this great Empire. I trust that it may 
please God, in His providence, to grant us now a cycle of 
more prosperous years ; but I hope also that the lessons of 
those periods of distress, hard though they may have seemed, will not be lost upon the Government of India, and that we shall profit by the experience which has been 
gained during these years of suffering, both in preparing 
such measures as may be calculated to guard against a 
recurrence of the evil, and also by alleviating in the most 
effectual manner the miseries entailed by famine, if it 
should again come upon us. 

Gentlemen,— You have spoken also of the war which has 
been in progress almost without intermission for the last 
two years on our north-western frontier. No one can think 
of that contest without feeling his heart beat quicker with 
an honourable and just pride at the recollection of the gallant deeds which, in this war, as on so many previous occasions, have been performed for our Queen-Empress 
and our country by Her Majesty’s troops, European and 
native alike ; and we are proud to recollect that, in these 
later times, both these services have shown themselves 
fully able to maintain the great and glorious reputation 
which the soldiers of England have won for themselves in 
every quarter of the globe. (Loud applause.) But, gentlemen, it will be my most earnest endeavour to bring that war, so far as lies in my power, to an early and to an 
honourable conclusion, in the, hope that, with returning 
peace, the Government of India may again be able to devote its attention to those works of internal improvement to which you have so rightly and wisely alluded. And I
can assure you that if it should be my lot during my tenure 
of office to contribute in any degree to the development of 
the resources of this great country—agricultural and industrial—and to promote to any extent the happiness and the welfare of the people of India, of all races, and creeds, 
and classes, and especially the prosperity of the mass of 
the people, I shall esteem it the greatest honour of my 
political life. (Applause.) 

Gentlemen,-- I thank you heartily for giving me this 
opportunity of meeting you—the representatives of the 
great and progressive community of Bombay. Through the 
kindness of Sir James Fergusson, I have already this morning had an opportunity of seeing something of this important city; and I need not tell you how greatly I have been 
struck by the beauty of the public buildings which have 
been recently erected here, and which certainly put to 
shame some of those which I have seen in great towns 
in England (applause.) ; and yet more, I may say, by the 
proof that you are engaged in other works—not above 
ground, but under ground— which are calculated to confer 
great benefits upon the community over which you rule. I rejoice to find that you are fully awake to the importance of sanitary improvements, which are of the greatest 
value to every country, and of the value of which men 
are becoming more and more convinced in the present 
day, and which, I venture to think, are of as great 
necessity in India as in any other part of the world. 
(Applause.) 

Gentlemen ,—I have mentioned the name of your Governor, Sir James Fergusson. (Applause.) I hope he will 
permit me to take this opportunity of expressing the great 
satisfaction I feel at finding that I shall have him, during 
my tenure of office as Governor General, as one of 
my colleagues in the administration of this country. 
(Applause.) Sir James Fergusson and myself sat for 
many years in that great school of public life, the House 
of Commons, and I know enough of him to be aware of 
the zeal and earnestness with which he will devote himself 
to the discharge of the great duties which will fall to his 
lot as Governor of Bombay ; and I know also that I may 
rely with the most undoubted confidence on his support on 
all occasions, and on receiving every possible co-operation 
from him. (Applause.) 

Gentlemen,— It only remains for me to say how heartily 
I wish you, as well as the community over which you rule, 
every possible prosperity. The kindness of your welcome 
to-day will be a great encouragement to me in the work 
which has been entrusted to me, which it will be my earnest endeavour, with God’s assistance, faithfully to discharge. (Loud applause.) 
