
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE TALUQDARS OF OUDH
Speaker: Lord Lansdowne
Audience: Taluqdars of Oudh
Date: 24 January 1894
Location: Kolkata
Notes: This is a reply address. The speech being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen, — It gives me much pleasure to receive the 
address which you have read to me on behalf of the 
Talukdars of Oudh, a body for which I entertain feelings 
of very sincere regard and respect. 

It is most satisfactory to me to learn that, in the opinion 
of the Talukdars, my conduct as head of the Government 
of India has deserved their confidence and approbation. 

Your address refers with much point to the struggle 
which is in progress between the new requirements of 
India and the old experiences of her people. I trust that 
the Government of India will, while endeavouring to meet 
those requirements, never allow themselves to lose sight 
of the importance which is to be attached to custom and 
tradition in a country where the spirit of the people is in 
many respects conservative. 

I regret that it should not have been my good fortune
to spend a larger portion of my term of office in your 
Province, but rejoice to know that it is committed to the 
charge of the tried and able administrator who now presides over it, and who has, both as a member of my Council, and as the head of the Local Government in the 
important Province of Burma, shown his ability to deal 
with the most intricate problems, and his courage in the 
face of grave difficulties. 

It gives me much satisfaction to notice your approval of 
the manner in which the Indian States have been dealt with 
during my term of office. It has been my endeavour to 
support the Chiefs and Rulers, and to give them all the 
encouragement in my power, subject only to the condition 
that they do not neglect or abuse their position. 

I am most grateful for your sympathy and good wishes, 
and I beg that you will not fail to convey to the body, 
which has deputed you to come here, my cordial acknowledgments of the courtesy which they have shown me. 
