
Title: OPENING OF THE FINE ARTS EXHIBITION AT SIMLA
Speaker: Lord Ripon
Audience: Members of the Fine Arts Society of Shimla
Date: 18 September 1880
Location: Shimla
Notes: 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Your Honor, Ladies and Gentlemen, — In rising to comply 
with the request just made to me by the Lieutenant 
Governor, I feel myself in one respect at some disadvantage, 
because, although this is (as you have just told us, Sir 
Robert) the thirteenth Exhibition of the Simla Fine Arts 
Society, it is the first occasion upon which I have had an 
opportunity of seeing the collections made for the Exhibition, and, under these circumstances, I have no means of instituting any comparison between this Exhibition and those 
which have preceded it, and knowing, so far as my own 
judgment might go, the progress which I doubt not has been made by this Society from year to year (applause). I must therefore content myself — in the remarks which 
according to custom, I am about, with your permission, to 
address to you before formally opening the Exhibition— with asking; you to consider with me, for a short time, what are the objects of the institution on whose behalf we 
are assembled here to-day? It must be borne in mind 
that the Exhibition collected within this compound 
has a twofold object. Here in the house itself we have a 
collection of drawings and paintings, and in the building 
outside we have another collection of Native works of industrial art ; and it is in these two separate aspects — first as a Fine Arts Society, and then as an Exhibition of Native 
Industrial Art — that the exhibition ought to be considered. 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, with respect to the object of the 
Fine Arts Society, I think it may briefly be defined to be to 
promote to the utmost the cultivation of the fine arts by persons in private life, and to establish, by means of prizes, a relative standard of excellence. Now, let us consider for a 
moment under what difficulties amateur artists in India 
have to do their work in connexion with artistic matters. 
It seems to me that those who devote themselves to the 
cultivation of the fine arts in this country generally labour 
under some disadvantages to which persons at home are not 
so much exposed, because I think it may be said with 
truth that almost everybody in India has plenty to do. 
There seems to be much less of that leisure which is so 
largely enjoyed by persons in England, and which those who 
are very fortunate devote to the cultivation of the fine arts ; 
for the military man in India has a hundred calls on him 
daily, and the civilian is hard at work from early morning 
till the shades of evening, and has but little time to devote 
to the worship of the Muses. But yet, if I mistake not, 
this Exhibition shows what soldier and civilian can alike 
accomplish, even under the difficulties which I have described, 
when they devote their leisure (perhaps the more keenly 
enjoyed because it is so short) to the cultivation and pursuit 
of the fine arts (applause) ; and we see on these walls ample 
proof that the amateur artist in India does not fall behind 
the same description of persons in England, and that, in spite of such difficulties as hot sun, and scorching wind, and sandy desert, he is still able to give us records of places famous in
history, of the grand scenes of oriental nature, and of the customs and features of the many races which dwell in this land (applause). We have, for instance, here an interesting spot 
on the coast of Bombay, represented alike in storm and in 
calm ; the Himalayas, on whose ridges Simla has so strangely 
perched itself, are depicted under various and striking 
aspects ; the sports of the field have supplied their characteristic subjects ; and, in the midst of all their arduous and successful labours, those gallant officers whose absence Sir 
Robert Egerton has so justly lamented, and who, I trust, 
will soon return and next year fill these rooms with their 
works, have found time to give us spirited sketches of those 
scenes in Afghanistan which have been rendered memorable 
by the deeds of the British army (applause). Take it all 
in all, as it appears to me, India is a rich field for the artist, 
abounding, as it does, in places of interest and buildings 
of great architectural beauty, and in scenes upon which 
Nature has lavished all her grandeur and her charm ; and I 
think that the truth of this estimate may be proved by 
even a cursory examination of the works which now adorn 
these walls. I feel, ladies and gentlemen, no little diffidence in venturing even upon the faintest criticism of works such as those which we see before us to-day, because, 
unfortunately, I am nothing of an artist myself, and I 
particularly dislike to hear people talking about that which 
they do not understand (laughter), I am bound to say that 
I never felt greater regret that, if I have any artistic talent, 
it was unfortunately so ill-cultivated that it was never developed (laughter), as I have done since I came to India, because it would have been most interesting and agreeable 
to me to have taken back with me on my return home some 
sketches which would have served to recall the beautiful 
and interesting scenes which I have already passed, and 
yet hope to pass through during my connection with this 
country (applause). But if you look at the pictures on 
these walls, representing Indian scenes, I think you will 
find ample proof that India is, as I have said, a rich field for 
the artist. There is that drawing of Major Pullan's of 
“Dwarka in storm," which is a remarkable work of art, and 
Captain Strahan’s most successful representation of mountain scenery "On the Chini Road;" while Lieutenant Radford and others give us very interesting reminiscences of 
the scenes through which our army has passed in Afghanistan, and Colonel Sankey contributes some charming landscape pieces. We have, too, a flower subject by Mrs. Graham, which, I confess, gave me quite a start, from the feeling of freshness, and the odour of flowers that seemed 
to come from it as one stood before it (applause and 
laughter). But it is not India alone that we find depicted 
here. We have also most pleasant reminders of England 
and the English life to which we hope some day to 
return ; we have those shady beeches so characteristic 
of many parts of our country, the representation of which 
by Dr. Willcocks has been so highly appreciated that 
the Committee have awarded to him the prize which I have 
the pleasure of giving upon this occasion (applause). And 
then we have a charming pair of "Blue Bells" by Captain 
Pierson, which I am certain all of you have seen with very 
great pleasure (applause.) But I have heard it remarked 
that there is some dissatisfaction in Simla Society because 
there are so few works from Captain Pierson’s pencil in 
this Exhibition. Well, ladies and gentlemen, I feel bound 
to take this opportunity of defending my gallant friend 
from any criticisms of that kind, by pointing out to you 
at the person who is addressing you is the real culprit 
in the matter, because I have been guilty of throwing 
upon him an amount of work, which he has done to my 
great advantage in a very able manner, however much it may have been to your detriment (applause). There is yet one other picture to which, even in this cursory examination of the contents of this Exhibition, I must invite your attention. To my mind it is a very striking picture, a picture in the other room by a native artist, Mr. Pestonjee Bomanjee, representing a Parsi priest at prayers ; and, I 
am bound to say, it seems to me that in its highly effective 
light and shade and warmth of colouring it is well worthy of 
the prize awarded to it, and an admirable example of what 
native artists are capable of doing (applause). 

And now, ladies and gentlemen, I will pass on, that I 
may not detain you long, to the consideration of the claims 
which the other portion of this Exhibition has upon our 
attention — I mean that part of it which contains specimens 
of Native Industrial Art, and which owes so much to the 
zeal, taste, and ability of my friend Captain Cole (applause). 
To me, ladies and gentlemen, that Exhibition has an especial 
interest. It is only in its infancy, for this I understand, is 
the second year of its existence ; but I hope and believe it 
may ultimately accomplish a valuable work, and that it will 
help to cultivate and encourage Native Art ; that is to say. 
Art really native, instinct with the style of the country, and 
based upon its ancient and historical artistic traditions (applause). I will venture to say that all the best Art which the world has ever seen has been truly national, the outcome 
of the religion, the history, and the civilization of each race. I confess, for myself, that I have no faith in eclecticism in Art. Art is not a dead thing, to be merely copied from 
the models of the past ; it is in its full power and perfection, 
the result and, as it were, the flower of a nation’s whole life 
(applause) ; and therefore, if Art is to flourish among the 
Natives of India, it must be Indian Art, not a cold and
barren imitation, however clever, of the Art of Europe, 
but the real product of the life and traditions of this land 
(applause). I rejoice to hope that, from the small and humble beginnings of this Exhibition which we see here to-day — those small beginnings from which almost all great 
and useful things have their commencement, — may come 
forth the cultivation by the natives of this country of 
their own Art, which will restore their claim to be counted 
among the artists of the world (applause). In this, as in 
all things in India, it is our duty, not to stifle or overpower 
the national life of the country, but to develop and uphold 
it (applause). If we were here only for a day, holding 
our position solely by our power, and retaining our grasp 
on India merely from the lust of empire, then we might perhaps desire that all national feelings, all recollection of their early history, all love of their characteristic art, should die out 
of the hearts of the Indian people. But if we believe, as I 
believe, that we occupy our present place in India in the course 
of God’s providence, not merely as passing conquerors, but 
with a great work to do for the people of the country, which 
will be interwoven with their history, and which has its due 
part to fulfil in their progress, then it should be our aim to 
keep alive all that is high and beautiful and noble in their 
past traditions and their past national life, and to encourage 
them to reverence and to admire it (applause). Nothing 
is easier than to destroy, and of all things Art can perhaps 
be destroyed most easily ; and one form of destruction is 
sometimes known in Europe under the name of restoration, 
I hope the day is not far distant when the ancient monuments of India may be placed under such control as will tend to preserve them intact and unmutilated to future 
ages (applause), — for it should be our endeavour more and 
more in this country, not to destroy, but to improve ; not 
to overthrow the traditions and native civilization of some 
of the most ancient races of the earth, but to elevate and 
purify and develope them ; to retain and strengthen what 
is good, to remove what is false and evil, and thus to wed 
together in indissoluble and prolific union the earliest and latest developments of the Aryan races (applause). I am the last man in the world to shrink from changes which the 
advance of time renders necessary, or cling to obsolete usages 
merely because they are old. I have no sympathy with the 
dry and barren spirit of conservation which struggles to preserve institutions and habits from which all life has departed ; but, at the same time, I am strongly convinced that reform, 
to be real and effective, must be tempered by reverence, and 
must be a growth, and not a mere construction ; and, while 
I would give the people of India the fullest benefit of 
modern science and modern knowledge of Western progress 
and Western civilization, I should desire to blend them with 
their own historical traditions so as to supplant no portion 
of them, except by something better, and to retain the 
harmony and continuity of their national life (applause). 

Now, if I am not mistaken, it is in something of this 
spirit that the Committee who have got together this Exhibition — and who, I trust, will continue their labours in future years — are conducting their work. There are there, in 
that outer building, many works which are modern in date, but what all those who have most judgment in this matter value in those works is the skilful reproduction of ancient 
patterns, or, what is better than the most skilful copying of 
such patterns, the working on ancient lines. It can be seen, 
from an examination of this Exhibition, how successfully 
this has been done in many cases ; and I am very glad to 
find that many Schools of Art (and I think I may specially 
mention the School of Jaipur) are working thoroughly in 
the true spirit, and have already done much to resuscitate
the beauties and attractions of Ancient Indian Art. Therefore it is, ladies and gentlemen, that I rejoice to see such an Exhibition as this, and that I trust, as I have said, that it is only the beginning of a large and valuable work (applause).

There is one circumstance which has been mentioned to 
me to-day, which, I think, is interesting, and that is, that this exhibition contains, in much larger proportion than the Exhibition of last year, works which have been contributed by the artists or manufacturers themselves, — the proportion of loan articles being much larger last year than 
this year. Now if an Exhibition of this kind is to have any 
practical effect upon Art, that is exactly what we want. 
Up here at Simla, the exhibition of the best models of 
Ancient Art would have very little influence on artist 
workmen ; but the bringing together the works of the present 
day and submitting them to the criticism of competent 
judges, and sending down the best of them with prizes and 
commendations — that is the most effective mode of cultivating good taste and encouraging the advance of Art (applause).

Ladies and Gentlemen, — I feel a great interest in this 
undertaking, not only for the reasons which I have mentioned, but also for another. There is, I fear, much in the conditions of modern life which tends to separate and keep 
apart the European and Native in this country somewhat 
more than was the case in former days. The rapidity of 
communication, the weekly mails, the frequent furloughs, 
in spite of their numerous advantages, all tend to a certain 
extent in that direction ; and therefore it is a great satisfaction to feel that there are other circumstances connected with our time which may counteract the evil ; and among 
them we may count that greater acquaintance which we 
possess in the present day with the history, the art, and the 
jurisprudence of the past, which ought to help us to know 
better, to appreciate more highly, the native civilization of 
India, — to feel how ignorant is the inclination to disparage 
it, and that it is upon the ancient foundations of that civilization alone that we can hope to erect firm and enduring the superstructure of that wider and higher life which it should 
be the great aim of our Government to foster and advance. 

Ladies and Gentlemen , — I now declare this Exhibition open (loud and prolonged applause). 
