
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Willingdon
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 18 April 1936
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Mr Mayor, Members of the Municipal Corporation of 
the City of Bombay,— In thanking you, Sir, most gratefully 
for the very generous expressions you have conveyed to us 
in the address which you have just read, I am sure you will 
understand if my reply is very brief, for (and I speak for 
my wife just as much as for myself) our hearts are very 
full, our feelings are very deep this morning. We are 
leaving here in India so many friends, so many interests 
and associations, so many thoughts of happy days spent 
among you all during the 16 years we have lived in this 
wonderful country. 

After listening to your charming and most flattering 
references to our Empire service, my wife and I are 
deeply touched, and our minds go back to the morning 
we first stood here 23 years ago and began our association with this Presidency which extended over six very happy years. 

You are perfectly right when you say, Sir, that it 
was here we passed through our apprenticeship of Empire 
service, and we are proud to feel that now, at the moment 
of our giving up our official life in India, you, who gave us 
our early training, have been good enough to say to us 
"well done, good and faithful servants” before we go. 

I know well that my regime has not escaped considerable criticism and controversy, but that is I fear inevitable in the life of anyone who is placed in a position of great 
responsibility. But this, as I look back over the years, I 
can truly, sincerely say, that I have worked honestly and 
to the best of my powers for friendship and good-will 
between our two races. I have laboured to improve conditions of life among all classes of the millions of our people ; I have striven without ceasing to help India 
forward to her goal of completely responsible Government. 

I am grateful indeed to you, Sir, this morning, for 
making no reference to the various problems that beset 
you and your Councillors in matters of Municipal 
administration, and sympathise with you in your anxieties 
during these most difficult years of depression, which I 
know have affected the economic and financial position of 
this great commercial and industrial city. But if I still 
know anything of the citizens of Bombay with whom I was 
so closely associated during the four years of the Great 
War, I am sure that the courage, enterprise and resourcefulness which you have shown in the past will be there in the future, and I am as optimistic as ever that before 
long your great city will once again be on the high road 
to increasing prosperity and progress. And now the time 
has come to say good-bye to what has been to both of us a 
wonderful period of service to the people of this country. 
If it be true that as a rule there is not much gratitude for 
services rendered, that certainly has not been so in our 
ease, for we have been overwhelmed with evidence of 
regret at our departure and appreciation of our work for 
which we are both truly and sincerely grateful. 

And before I set sail from the shores of India today, may I leave with you the same watchword which I
brought with me when I first landed here long years ago 
to become Governor of the Bombay Presidency. It is the 
one word co-operation. Co-operation between our two 
races which has brought so many benefits to this country 
in the past and will bring many more in the future, if we 
avoid those feelings of suspicion and distrust and believe 
in each other’s sincerity ; co-oporation with a common 
purpose and with mutual endeavour to make this great 
country, with all its wonderful history and tradition, 
powerful and prosperous in this modern world, a full 
partner in shaping the destinies of the British Empire. 