
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE MUSLIM COMMITTEE OF BOMBAY
Speaker: Lord Willingdon
Audience: Muslim Committee of Bombay
Date: 17 April 1936
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen,— I am very glad to have this opportunity 
of meeting once again the members of the Muslim Committee before I leave India, and I am most grateful to them and to you, Sir, for your kind thought in presenting me 
with this farewell address and for your good wishes to Her 
Excellency and myself. 

You have been good enough to refer in a very appreciative manner to such services as I have been able to render to this great country of India, and in particular during the 
last five years. It has been, as you say, a critical and often 
an anxious time, but I am particularly glad to hear that you 
consider that I have done my part not only in giving India 
a new Constitution but also in creating that atmosphere 
of peace and tranquillity which is so essentially necessary 
for the success of that Constitution. But the credit does 
not belong to me alone and I take this opportunity of 
thanking the Muslim Community for the support they have 
given me. Throughout this period the whole trend of 
responsible opinion in the Community has been against 
any form of unconstitutional agitation and while pressing 
their claims and taking steps to safeguard their interests, 
they have never lost sight of the great object which we 
all have in view- the political advancement of a united 
India. 

You, Sir, referred in your address to the widespread 
demonstrations of public feeling which were evinced on 
the joyful occasion of His late Majesty’s Silver Jubilee 
and again on the sad day of Mis late Majesty’s death. 
Those demonstrations clearly showed to the world at large 
that India is. as you have rightly claimed, second to none 
in her regard and affection for the Ruler of our great 
Empire. Those demonstrations further showed that 
whatever talk there may be in certain quarters of independence and separation, India, as a whole, realises to the full the value of the union of our two races and of partnership within the British Commonwealth of Nations. 

You were, good enough to say that the names of Her 
Excellency and myself were near and dear to India. India 
will always be very near and dear to us, and it is perhaps 
unnecessary for me to say that we will continue to serve 
her to the best of our ability in the years that lie before us 
as we have since the day we first landed in Bombay some 
twenty-three years ago. 

Gentlemen, in conclusion, I thank you from the bottom 
of my heart, for your charming address. We shall carry 
away with us affectionate recollections of the good wishes 
and of the kindly tribute extended to us by the Muslim 
Committee in Bombay. 