
Title: PATRIOTIC FUND MEETING AT SIMLA
Speaker: Lord Ripon
Audience: Dignitaries of Shimla
Date: 14 September 1880
Location: Shimla
Notes: This is a reply address. After "...the first resolution" there is a description of some proposals by people at the meeting. To mark this break in the speech, I have used 'xxxxx'
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Your Honor, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen,— 
It becomes my duty, as occupying the chair on this occasion, to place briefly before you the objects of the meeting which is assembled here to-day; and I am confident that 
the purpose which has brought us together this evening is 
one which will fully command the sympathy of all who are 
present (cheers), because we are met here for the purpose 
of marking our sense of the great services rendered to 
their Sovereign and their country by the troops of the 
Queen during the Afghan war (cheers). 

Now, ladies and gentlemen, it must be borne in mind 
that this is a public, and not an official, meeting. We are 
not met here to call for subscriptions by an order of the 
Government; but to submit an appeal which we think 
worthy of the attention of our fellow-subjects in this district, and, through them, to other parts of India : and I am bound to say, for myself, that I rejoice to find in India those free habits of public meeting to which I have been accustomed at home (cheers), and to be able to make my appeal 
to you, not in the tone of command, but upon grounds 
which commend themselves alike to our hearts and to our 
intellects, and which prove how much of true and honest 
sympathy there may and ought to be among all the Indian 
subjects of our Queen-Empress (cheers). We stand here 
upon this occasion, ladies and gentlemen, upon common 
ground, and we appeal to feelings which are shared alike 
by all men : and I rejoice to think that the support which 
this movement is receiving on the present occasion, and 
has already received in other quarters from native gentlemen, as well as from Europeans, is a happy omen of that ever-increasing co-operation which ought to exist, and 
which I trust will exist more and more, between men of all 
classes of the Indian community (hear, hear, and cheers). 

Now, before I proceed to lay very briefly before you the 
grounds upon which I think this move indent is entitled to 
your sympathy and support, I will recall to your recollection the steps which have hitherto been taken in this matter. 

Some time ago, communications were received from various native princes and native gentlemen in different parts of the country, expressing their desire to contribute to the 
comfort of our troops in Afghanistan, and to the provision 
for the wives and families of those who fell in the war. 
Some very large subscriptions were offered upon that occasion, and the matter was brought under the consideration of my predecessor, Lord Lytton ; and he determined that it 
was desirable that this movement should not take an official 
form— a sentiment in which I cordially share— but that an 
independent Committee should be established to receive 
the subscriptions which might be offered, and to see to 
their proper application; and a Committee was consequently formed by ray predecessor, under the presidency 
of my honourable and gallant friend Sir Edwin Johnson ; 
and various subscriptions (some, as I have said, of large amount) have been received — entirely, I believe, from native gentlemen —by that Committee. Soon after the 
Committee was formed, there took place that unhappy and 
unprovoked renewal of hostilities in the southern part of 
Afghanistan which in its tragical, and also its glorious events, 
have excited so much of sympathy and of attention in the 
public mind (cheers) ; and the consequence was that, as a 
large portion of the troops serving in that country belonged 
to the Bombay Army my right honourable friend Sir James 
Fergusson, the Governor of Bombay, yielded to a wish expressed to him on the part of the leading gentlemen of that city, European and native, and undertook to preside 
at a public meeting for the purpose of establishing what has 
been called a Patriotic Fund. That meeting, as my right 
honourable friend informs me, was of a most enthusiastic 
and loyal character, and it was, he tells me, a very great pleasure to him to preside on that occasion; and it was then determined that there should be opened a list of subscriptions for the Patriotic Fund in aid of the widows and families of our soldiers, European and native, who had 
fallen in the course of the Afghan war (cheers) . The original Committee established by Lord Lytton—having to deal almost, if not quite, exclusively with the subscriptions of 
native princes and gentlemen— had intended, I believe, to 
devote any money they might receive to the native army 
alone; but when it became evident that the Bombay meeting had adopted a wider scheme, and had determined to include in the benefits of the Fund to be raised, all Her 
Majesty’s soldiers, of whatever race, who were serving in 
the present war, it was clear, as it seemed to me, that it 
would be altogether impossible to confine the operations of 
the Central Committee within the limits originally intended. 
I am bound to say that I think the example set by Bombay 
was a good one, and that I am very glad that we should 
now follow it (cheers) ; and I entertain no kind of fear that 
any of those distinguished native gentlemen who have already subscribed to the Fund will object to this extension of it to Europeans as well as to natives. I feel confident 
that it will commend itself to them as much as it does to 
us (hear, hear) ; and at all events, should any difficulty 
arise in the matter, it is one that can easily be arranged. 

Such, ladies and gentlemen, is the history of what has 
passed in respect to the Fund in whose interests we are 
assembled this afternoon. And now let me ask you to consider for a few moments what is the nature of the claims which our soldiers of the armies engaged in the Afghan 
war have upon the sympathy of their fellow-countrymen, 
and I may also say, of their fellow-country women. We 
are not here, ladies and gentlemen, to discuss any questions of policy; we are here to consider the claims of those who have performed, bravely and loyally, the duties which 
were imposed upon them, and have responded unhesitatingly to every call (cheers). 

The late Afghan war has been distinguished by many 
acts of bravery, and by many deeds which show that British soldiers, European or native, have not degenerated from their former reputation (cheers). Ali Musjid, the 
Peiwar Kotal, Charasiab, Kabul, Ahmed Kheyl, and Kandahar are there to prove the truth of my assertion (loud cheers). But it seems to me that no less honour has been 
won by the patient endurance of the weary march, of the 
wearing escort duty, of the climate so trying, especially to 
native troops, and of the long waiting when no active duty 
was going on, and when thoughts of home naturally rushed 
into the soldier’s heart (loud cheers), than was secured by 
the desperate charge, the gallant onslaught, or the firm 
resistance to the attack (continued cheers). I admire, 
ladies and gentlemen, with a just pride, the deeds of the 
victors of Ahmed Kheyl and Kandahar; I admire those 
splendid soldiers who, under their gallant chief. Sir 
Frederick Roberts (loud cheers), have lately performed 
a march which will long be famous in Indian military history, and who won a battle which has displayed alike the skill of the general and the admirable qualities of his troops (cheers). But I no less admire those who for long weary months have guarded the Khyber Line, and who, in a pestilential climate and ever-recurring round of monotonous duty, have fulfilled the task entrusted to them with unalterable steadiness and devotion; and I admire yet more the conduct, scarcely sullied by a single crime, which our 
troops have manifested towards the people of the country 
which they have been lately occupying (cheers). We 
have here, it seems to me, ladies and gentlemen, a display 
of all the best military qualities— courage, endurance, 
patience, self-restraint; and it is to honour such qualities 
that we are assembled this evening (cheers). In those 
armies, European and native, so gallant, so loyal, so enduring, many have fallen—some in battle, some by disease, some by the ambush of a desperate foe ; and they have left 
behind them wives and children, dear to them, dependent 
on their exertions, and in their dying moments they have 
entrusted them to the care of their fellow-countrymen 
(cheers). Shall we not, then, answer to that call? Have 
they no claim upon us, who have not had to endure any of 
those trials, but who on this, as on so many former occasions, will profit by the valour and the firmness of our troops (cheers). Surely, ladies and gentlemen, we may hold it 
an honour to be permitted to minister to the wants of those 
who have been left behind by the men who have suffered 
and died for their country (cheers). The Government of 
India is not ungenerous towards the families of its soldiers, 
and upon this, as upon other occasions, it is most ready to 
do its duty ; but the powers of the Government of India in 
this matter are necessarily limited by the consideration 
that the money at its disposal comes from public taxation, 
and that we cannot be generous at the expense of others, 
when our taxes come, as they do to so large an extent in 
this country, from the pockets of the poorest classes of the community. There is, therefore, as it seemed to me, a large field for public exertion and a just and ample necessity for 
an appeal to public support. Everything which tends to 
promote independent public action in India seems to me to 
be in itself a great benefit, and I rejoice that we should 
upon this occasion be able to afford to the public of all 
classes and of all races an opportunity of taking part in 
this noble work (hear, hear). 

Ladies and Gentlemen,— This is not a large meeting such 
as might have been assembled in Calcutta or Bombay ; but 
we have present here to-day some who are well entitled to 
be heard on an occasion like this. In the first place, we 
have His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, the head of 
the Army in India, European and native, with whom I 
rejoice to think that ever since I came out here I have co-operated with the most entire and unclouded cordiality (cheers). From him I have received the most hearty assistance, and to him it has been my pleasure as well as my duty to render the utmost support in my power (continued 
cheers). We have here also one, not to speak of others, 
who has won for himself the acknowledgments of his 
Sovereign and of his countrymen (loud cheers) by his eminent services, both military and political, in Afghanistan. . . . . I see, ladies and gentlemen, that you know I am alluding to my gallant friend Sir Donald Stewart (loud cheers). They are ready to address you, and I will not, 
therefore, detain you longer, except once more to exhort you, 
and, through you, the people of India, to mark, by your free 
and ready answer to the call which is now made upon you, 
your deep sense of the claims which our soldiers of every race and every clime have upon the generosity of those who have witnessed their courage, their patience, and their endurance, and who, without sharing their trials, will still partake of their glory (loud cheers). 

Ladies and Gentlemen, — I wish to state that it is my intention to contribute Rs. 3,000 to the Fund it is intended to raise (cheers). I will now call on his Excellency the Commander-in-Chief to move the first resolution. 

xxxxx

Your Honor, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen,- I 
am much obliged to you for the very kind manner in which 
you have received this resolution, and which I think, from 
the manner in which you have acknowledged it, I may take 
as having been passed cordially on your part (cheers). I 
can assure you that it has been a very great pleasure to me 
to be able to be present; on this occasion. Naturally, from 
the position which I have been called to fill, I must feel the 
strongest possible interest in all that interests those brave 
men who have been fighting now for two years the battles 
of their country beyond the frontiers of India (cheers). 
Besides this, I may perhaps be permitted to say that I 
have all my life had a very deep interest in the welfare of 
our soldiers. Indeed, in my early youth it was the groat 
object of my ambition, if I had been permitted to follow 
it, to have had the honour of serving in Her Majesty’s army 
myself (cheers), and, having served for a few years under 
that distinguished man who, as Secretary of State for War, 
did perhaps more than any one else to promote the welfare 
of the British soldier —I mean Mr. Sidney Herbert— I have, 
from the lessons learnt at his feet, always felt an earnest 
desire to promote in every way in my power everything 
which could tend to increase the happiness or the welfare 
of the British soldier; and I heartily recognise that the 
same sentiments which prompt us at, home to look after 
the interests of the European soldier, should prompt us 
equally and to the full share in India in regard to all that 
concerns that gallant native army which has, in late campaigns, so highly distinguished itself (loud cheers). 