
Title: FAREWELL ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MILL-OWNERS' ASSOCIATION
Speaker: Lord Irwin
Audience: Bombay Mill-Owners' Association
Date: 16 April 1931
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 

Gentlemen, — The hospitality of Bombay must be my 
excuse if my reply to your address is brief. But in the 
all too short period of my last visit I am to have the 
pleasure of receiving four addresses, and time, our inexorable master, will not stay. 

I am most grateful to you for your address and for 
the occasion which it has afforded to me of meeting once 
more the members of a body, which has so large a part 
to play in the economic life of the City of Bombay. Your 
members have been through hard times, due to many causes 
on which it is not now necessary for me to dwell. I was 
glad when the Government of India were able to give some 
practical assistance to the industry, even at the expense 
of inevitable reproaches from other quarters. And I 
need not assure you that I shall continue to watch your 
future with close interest. 

You have referred, Mr. Chairman, in kindly terms to 
my work in India during the last five years. They have 
been difficult years, more difficult indeed even than I 
anticipated when I first came among you. But I shall 
always be grateful that I was given this opportunity to 
play a part in these great events, and to do what I might 
to guide their course. The end of the road, as you say, 
is not yet, and much still remains to be done. You, Mr. 
Chairman, were able to take a very useful part in the 
Round Table Conference, and will I hope before long be 
carrying the work further that was there so well begun. 
You, gentlemen, I would ask to use all your efforts to bring 
about a happier understanding among all those in India, 
upon whom you can exert your influence. 

For, if we are to realise the ideal of partnership 
between two great peoples, to which your address alludes, 
then we must dethrone from men's hearts the discord, 
mistrust and misunderstanding which for the last three 
years have perpetually blocked the path, and we must 
exalt in their place the true desire and determination for 
peace. We have a chance to do so now, and I would ask 
every member of Government, all political parties and 
communities, to do their utmost alike to seize it if we 
could only all join together, European and Indian, communities, parties, official and non-official, in a single united effort, we should already be more than half way to success. 

I believe that the settlement, with which Mr. Gandhi 
was so closely associated and which I know he is doing his 
best to implement, has been of great value in one special 
direction, in assisting towards the removal of these doubts 
find misgivings ; but I cannot conceal from myself that 
here also much remains to be done. I particularly regret 
the tendency, manifest in some quarters, to regard the 
immediate future as a period of truce, of which advantage 
should be taken to reorganise forces for a further struggle, 
since the state of mind it represents is not only inconsistent with the whole-hearted discharge of the obligations which the settlement imposes, but contains within it 
dangerous germs of trouble. It is a continuous menace to 
the peace which it was our intention, and remains my 
dearest desire, to see re-established. On the one hand, it 
arouses forces which those who call them into being may 
find difficult of control ; on the other hand, it necessarily 
imposes on Government the duty of preparedness for 
counter action, and I fully recognise that the discharge of 
this duty must inevitably in its turn breed distrust. 

Let all men therefore pursue peace, not as a temporary 
expedient, but as an enduring blessing, and I have no 
doubt that it is thus and thus only that the abiding 
interests of India can be served. 

Gentlemen, I must conclude. Lady Irwin and I shall 
leave India with your good wishes echoing in our ears. 
For these we thank you again, and, in my turn, I wish 
you and those for whom you speak all happiness and good 
fortune. 

