
Title: HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY'S REPLY TO THE ADDRESS PRESENTED TO HIM BY THE LEADING REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NORTH-WEST FRONTIER PROVINCE AT PESHAWAR ON 27TH NOVEMBER 1943
Speaker: Lord Wavell
Audience: Representatives of the North-West Frontier Province
Date: 27 November 1943
Location: Peshawar
Notes: This address is a response
Additional Audiences:

Speech:


Gentlemen.- It gives me a very, special pleasure to 
receive a welcome on behalf of the people of the North-West 
Frontier Province. Your Province and people have long held 
an affectionate place in my memory. I served for three 
years as a voting officer in Peshawar nearly 40 years ago, 
and I have always looked hack on those years as some of the 
pleasantest of my life. I was young and had few 
responsibilities and cares and my interests were in soldiering and sport. I was in a country of manly people of fine 
spirit and physique, who also liked sport and soldiering, 
and whom I liked and admired. So that I have always 
looked back to those days with special pleasure. Since 
then I have seen much of your soldiers, both in the last 
Great War and in this, in which they have served under me 
with much distinction.

I made one short visit here as Commander-In-Chief 
more than two years ago. Now I revisit the scene of 
which I have happy and carefree memories, as Viceroy, 
with very great responsibilities and cares. 

I have admired the steadiness of this Province under 
the stress of war and the wise leadership of your 
distinguished Governor. I thank you for the very substantial contribution you have made in men, money and 
material towards the prosecution of the war, which is now, 
after many vicissitudes, beginning to draw to a victorious 
close. 

I watch with great interest, the work of your Ministry 
under provincial autonomy. You appreciate, I am sure, 
that though your Province is approximately self-sufficient 
in food grains, there must be an all-India food policy, and 
that economy is no less essential where there is a surplus 
or self-sufficiency than where there is shortage. 

I think you may rest, assured that the interests of the 
Frontier Province will not be overlooked in the schemes 
for post-war development or in recruitment to the Central 
Services. 

I take note of your request that the Subvention to the 
North-West Frontier Province should be increased. But 
you will realise there may be serious difficulties over revising the financial arrangements between the Centre and the 
Provinces. 

Gentlemen, I thank you again for the warm welcome 
you have given me. I wish my wife could have been here 
to see, something of a Province and people of which she has 
often heard me speak so warmly. I give you my best 
wishes for the peace arid prosperity of your Province and 
for your health and good fortune. 

I am afraid that I have forgotten practically all the 
Pushtu which your distinguished fellow citizen, Ahmed 
Jan, taught me nearly 40 years ago; but at least I have 
always remembered the simplest and best of all greetings: 
"May yo I never be tired.” 
