
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
Speaker: Lord Reading
Audience: Bombay Municipal Corporation
Date: 2 April 1921
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address.The Right Honourable the Earl and Countess of Reading arrived in Bombay Harbour on the night of the 1st April but did not land till about 8 A..M. on the 2nd April 
Additional Audiences:

Speech: 


Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Municipal Corporation 
of Bombay.— Pray accept my very cordial thanks for the 
address of welcome you have just read, and for the warm-hearted greetings and good wishes of the Corporation and the citizens of Bombay. You have expressed their sentiments in 
such eloquent language that my earnest desire to contribute 
to the welfare and happiness of India and the Indian people 
would, if possible, be intensified. Doubtless this is the experience of every new Viceroy, for it would be presumptuous indeed to imagine that any of my predecessors on landing on 
these shores would be animated otherwise than by the best intentions and highest motives ; but I should not be human if at this first moment of finding myself in India I were not almost overwhelmed by the magnitude of the task I have undertaken and the vast responsibilities that will devolve upon me. It 
is, therefore, especially gratifying when the heart looks around 
for some encouragement and support, to find your address 
of welcome. Evidently no pains have been spared to make 
me, almost a complete stranger, feel that you are particularly 
desirous of displaying the innate Eastern courtesy by extending a friendly hand and gracious smile to one who comes here charged with so high and important a mission. Your 
well-known loyalty to the King-Emperor would of itself assure 
an official welcome ; but I think I detect something more 
delicate and more graceful in your address. I note especially 
your sympathetic reference to the ancient race to which 
I belong, and I observe with pleasure that you state that your 
pride in welcoming me is enhanced by this circumstance. 
It is my only connection with the East until the present moment and this leads me to wonder whether perhaps, by some fortunate almost indefinably subtle sub-consciousness, it may 
quicken and facilitate my understanding of the aims and 
aspirations, the trials and tribulations, the joys and sorrows 
of the Indian people, and assist me to catch the almost inarticulate cries and inaudible whispers of those multitudes who sometimes suffer most and yet find it difficult, if not impossible, 
to express their needs. As I listened, Mr. President, to your 
brief but succinct recital of the plans and activities of your 
municipality, I recognised that you have every reason to 
be proud of it and of its energy and capacity in striving to 
solve in its own way problems that confront us in England 
and throughout the civilised world. The provision of better 
housing accommodation is surely one of the best means of 
discharging the important duties and responsibilities that rest 
upon the shoulders of those entrusted with the municipal 
welfare of citizens. These efforts bear eloquent testimony to 
the local patriotism and the public spirit of the municipality 
and its citizens. Those who, in the future, inhabit or visit 
this great and beautiful city will have cause gratefully to 
remember the activities of His Excellency Sir George Lloyd, 
who, in spite of the unceasing calls upon his time, has devoted 
so much thought and energy to carrying through the great 
development scheme and has, for so excellent a purpose, 
taken advantage of the powers to raise the first provincial loan in the Presidency. I earnestly trust that the success which has hitherto attended the scheme will continue throughout its execution and after its completion, and that the results will be so beneficial that even the sceptics, if there are any, 
will stand convinced and will join in praise of all concerned. 

Your proposed plans for increasing the supply of water 
and for improving the sanitation, are of great interest. What 
more important subjects can occupy the attention of a municipality than housing, water-supply, and drainage ? I need not dilate upon their obvious value to the community, and 
for this reason I shall be prepared to give sympathetic consideration to such financial proposals as may require support and encouragement from me. I am looking forward to becoming 
more closely acquainted with your proposed operations, under 
the guidance and with the companionship of His Excellency 
the Governor, whom I am glad to claim as an old colleague 
in the House of Commons. 

I thank you for the very kindly reference you make to 
the public service I have been able to render to my country. 
I am very grateful for the privilege of the opportunities that 
have been afforded to me in the past. When after the war 
I laid down my position as Special Ambassador to the United
States of America and returned to the Lord Chief Justiceship of England, I little thought that I should so soon voluntarily retire to accept the higher and more exalted office of 
Viceroy of India. I know that the task that awaits me is 
as you say "arduous indeed" — I was aware of it when I gave 
my place of serene dignity to accept a place of perhaps 
greater dignity, but certainly of less serenity. But I shall 
set out, cheered and encouraged by your welcome, with hopefulness in my heart, and mainly because all my experience of human beings and human affairs has convinced me that justice 
and sympathy never fail to evoke responsive chords in the 
hearts of men of whatever race, creed or class. They are the 
two brightest gems in any diadem. Without them there is 
no lustre in the Crown, —with them there is a radiance that 
never fails to attract loyalty and affection. You draw attention to the close approximation of views expressed by that great Indian Dadabhai Naoroji, whom I had the honour to 
know, with those enunciated by me from my seat as Lord 
Chief Justice, when taking leave of bench and bar. It is 
true that as Viceroy I shall be privileged to practise justice 
in larger fields than in the courts of law. The justice now 
in my charge is not confined within statutes or law reports ; 
it is a justice that is unfettered and has regard to all conditions 
and circumstances, and should be pursued in close alliance with 
sympathy and understanding. Above all it must be regardless of distinctions of race, creed, or class. I trust that the British reputation for justice may never be impaired during 
my tenure of office, and am convinced that all who are associated in the government and administration of Indian affairs will strive their utmost to maintain this reputation at its highest 
standard. 

As yon observe, Mr. President, I arrive in India at a very 
momentous period of its political history. His Royal Highness the Duke of Connaught, an old and tried friend of India, has only just left these shores after taking part in his own 
simple, dignified, affectionate, and touching way, as a Special 
Representative of the King-Emperor in the ceremonies of 
inauguration of the New Councils and Reforms. These are 
now in operation and will ever be associated with the name of 
His Excellency the Viceroy whose tenure of office is just expiring, and the present Secretary of State. 

What the people of India will write on the pages of the 
new book which is opened by this era of political advancement must inevitably have a most important effect upon the future of India, — and yet, notwithstanding these great progressive reforms, I must regretfully admit your statement that there is discontent in India. I join with you, Mr. President, 
in the prayer that it may be my good fortune to allay it, 
but I must not at this moment discuss its causes or effects. 
India is too responsive and too generous to expect me to make 
pronouncements which could not be based upon my own 
individual observation and information. Any declaration 
of policy to-day would be, must be, founded upon the opinions 
of others, and could not be the result of my own deliberate 
judgment. I feel convinced that I shall best discharge my 
duty to the King-Emperor, and serve the interests of India 
if I take time to collect information, seek advice, and form 
conclusions, — meanwhile I must not utter an incautious word 
or take a hasty step. I have no doubt that India will understand and respect my reticence at this moment. 

Let me express the grateful thanks of my wife for your 
welcome and good wishes for her health and happiness. Permit me to join her in these expressions and to add that the opportunity of helping to promote the welfare of the women 
and children of the country contributes notably to the attractions of her position here. 

In conclusion, Mr. President, I pray that it may be my 
good fortune during my tenure of office, to achieve, with the 
loyal and whole-hearted co-operation of British and Indians, 
some lasting benefit for India, and that these next years 
may revive and enhance her economic prosperity, and contribute to her material and spiritual well being, to the end that peace, good-will, and happiness may reign among her 
people. 