
Title: ADDRESS FROM THE BOMBAY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
Speaker: Lord Hardinge
Audience: Bombay Chamber of Commerce
Date: 18 November 1910
Location: Mumbai
Notes: This is a reply address and the address being replied to is also in the book.
Additional Audiences: 

Speech: 

Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen of the Bombay 
Chamber of Commerce,— It is a great pleasure to me to 
receive you here this morning, and the address that you 
have presented, while still under the vivid impression 
created on arriving for the first time in the Port of 
Bombay, the great gate of entry into India, with all its 
natural beauties, and its docks and quays teeming with 
shipping and active commercial life and enterprise. The 
impression is one that I shall not easily forget. 


The complexity of Indian Administration is well 
illustrated by the address to which I have just listened, 
and in the few remarks that I shall make, it would be 
presumptuous for me, at so early a stage, to pretend to 
any special knowledge or authority. 


To take at random one of the subjects to which you 
refer—the scarcity of unskilled labour, and its dearness— I can fully understand what a serious effect this must have upon the margin of profit of any business enterprise, but 
if you look at the other side of the shield and consider 
the steady increase of the cost of living, it is difficult to 
avoid the conclusion that unless there had been some 
corresponding increase in their wages, the condition of 
the labouring population must necessarily have become 
pitiable. 


Your testimony to the general prosperity, not only of 
this City, but of India as a whole, is, I need hardly say, 
most welcome to me; and your reference to the ravages 
of plague gives me the opportunity of congratulating you 
upon the present diminution of that terrible scourge. 
May it please God to continue this mercy to your City, 
and to deliver India from so great a tribulation. 


I have already said elsewhere that I intend to maintain the policy of Lord Minto’s Government, and I anticipate with confidence that the enlargement of the 
Councils, and the increase of their powers will give a 
clearer voice and greater weight to the views of the 
various communities of this great country than is furnished by the occasional presentation of a formal address. 


In your observations upon the gold standard reserve 
and railway development you have touched upon difficult 
questions, which have formed the subject of much discussion in the past, and are likely to engage the anxious consideration of Government in the future. I can assure 
you that any opinions which the commercial community 
may feel called upon lo express in furtherance of their 
solution, whether by the voice of their representatives in 
Council, or otherwise, shall receive sympathetic attention. I note your appreciation of the increasing 
tendency of Government to take you into their confidence 
in matters affecting your welfare, 


My experience in foreign countries has brought me 
to realise the importance of commerce as affecting political questions: its problems have occupied my attention not only abroad, but throughout the period of my service 
in the Foreign Office, and I have always attached to 
them a special importance. You may rest assured of 
my sympathetic and active interest in all matters affecting your commercial and industrial life, and I shall rely at the same time upon your helpful co-operation in all 
matters affecting the development of the trade and resources of this great Empire. 


In conclusion let me thank you, Gentlemen, for your 
congratulations, and for the compliments you have paid 
me. I appreciate the trouble that you—busy men as you 
are—have taken in coming here to present to me this 
address; and I thank you warmly for the cordiality of 
your welcome. 

